Primordial Black Holes
Bernard Carr,a and Florian K¨uhnelb
aQueen Mary University of London, School of Physics & Astronomy, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, UK
bMax Planck Institute for Physics, Physics, Boltzmannstr. 8, 85748 Garching, Germany
© 20xx Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Chapter Article tagline: update of previous edition,, reprint..
Key Points
•
Primordial black holes may have formed in the early Universe due to the compression of the big bang, their most likely source being
inflationary density fluctuations or some form of cosmological phase transition.
•
Numerous constraints from astrophysics and particle physics imply that the fraction of the early Universe collapsing must be tiny but
the implied fine-tuning problem can be resolved in some scenarios.
•
Such black holes would not grow much and could be small enough for quantum radiation to be important, those below 1015 g having
evaporated with important consequences for the early Universe.
•
Those larger than 1015 g could provide the dark matter, explain some of the recently observed gravitational wave events and act as seeds
for supermassive black holes and early cosmic structures.
•
An attractive scenario which combines all of these features suggests that the black holes have a solar mass and formed at the QCD
epoch, although it is also possible that the dark matter comprises black holes of planetary or asteroidal mass.
•
Studies of primordial black holes potentially probe four areas of physics: the early Universe, gravitational collapse, high-energy physics
and quantum gravity.
Nomenclature
AGN
Active Galactic Nuclei
BBN
Big Bang Nucleosynthesis
CDM
Cold Dark Matter
CMB
Cosmic Microwave Background
EGRET
Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope
EROS
Exp´erience pour la Recherche d’Objets Sombres
GW
Gravitational Wave
HSC
Hyper Suprime-Camera
IMBH
Intermediate Mass Black Hole
IPTA
International Pulsar Timing Array
JWST
James Webb Space Telescope
KAGRA
Kamioka Gravitational-Wave Detector
LIGO
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory
LVK
LIGO-Virgo KARGRA
LSST
Large Synoptic Survey Telescope
MACHO
Massive Compact Halo Object
OGLE
Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment
PBH
Primordial Black Hole
QCD
Quantum Chromo Dynamics
SMBH
SuperMassive Black Hole
WIMP
Weakly Interacting Massive Particle
UFDG
Ultra-Faint Dwarf Galaxy
Abstract
In this chapter we first describe the early history of primordial black hole (PBH) research. We then discuss their possible formation
mechanisms, including critical collapse from inflationary fluctuations and various types of phase transition. We next describe the
numerous constraints on the number density of PBHs from various quantum and astrophysical processes. This was the main focus
of research until recently but there is currently a shift of emphasis to the search for evidence for PBHs. We end by discussing this
evidence, with particular emphasis on their role as dark matter candidates, sources of gravitational waves and seeds for supermassive
black holes and early cosmic structures.
Keywords: Black holes; Compact objects; Cosmology; Dark matter; Early universe; Gravitational lensing; Gravitational wave astron-
omy; Hawking radiation; Primordial black holes
1
arXiv:2502.15279v1  [astro-ph.CO]  21 Feb 2025
2
Primordial Black Holes
Introduction
According to general relativity, when a region of mass M is compressed within its Schwarzschild radius, RS ≡2GM/c2, it forms a black
hole. While these objects could theoretically exist across many mass scales, natural astrophysical processes can only create them above
a solar mass. Black holes several times heavier than the Sun can form at the endpoint of stellar evolution, with our Galaxy’s disc alone
containing hundreds of millions of them. Stars larger than a few hundred solar masses, above the pair-instability mass gap, can potentially
form Intermediate Mass Black Holes (IMBHs) through direct collapse. This is the category that might include the Universe’s earliest stars.
Supermassive Black Holes (SMBHs), with masses from 106 M⊙to 1010 M⊙, reside in galactic nuclei and would power quasars. The one at
the center of the Milky Way has a mass of 4 × 106 M⊙.
Another type of black hole could have formed during the Universe’s earliest moments and these are called “primordial”. Comparing the
cosmological density at a time t after the Big Bang with the density needed for matter to collapse within its Schwarzschild radius, implies
that primordial black holes (PBHs) would have of order the cosmic horizon mass, M ∼c3 t/G, at formation. Their possible masses therefore
span a huge range: from the Planck mass (MPl ∼10−5 g) if created at the Planck time (10−43 s), to a solar mass (1 M⊙) if formed during the
quantum chromodynamics (QCD) epoch (10−5 s) and 105 M⊙if generated at t ∼1 s. So PBHs could exist below the traditional solar-mass
threshold. They could also be small enough for Hawking radiation to be important, those lighter than Earth being hotter than the cosmic
microwave background (CMB) and those below 1015 g evaporating within the current age of the Universe.
The wide mass range of black holes and their crucial role in linking macrophysics and microphysics is summarised in Figure 1. The
edge of the orange circle can be regarded as a sort of “clock” in which the scale changes by a factor of 10 for each minute, from the Planck
scale at the top left to the scale of the observable Universe at the top right. The top itself corresponds to the Big Bang because at the
cosmological horizon distance one is peering back to an epoch when the Universe was very small, so the very large meets the very small
there. The various types of black holes are labelled by their mass and positioned according to their Schwarzschild radius. On the right are
the astrophysical black holes, with the well-established stellar and supermassive ones corresponding to the segments between 5 and 50 M⊙
and between 106 and 1010 M⊙, respectively. On the left — and possibly extending to the right — are the more speculative PBHs.
The vertical line between the bottom (planetary-mass black holes) and the top (Planck-mass black holes) provides a convenient division
between the microphysical and macrophysical domains. Quantum emission is suppressed by accretion of the CMB to the right of the bottom
point, so this might be regarded as the transition to classical black holes. The effects of extra dimensions could be important at the top,
especially if they are compactified on a scale much larger than the Planck length. In this context, there is a sense in which the whole Universe
might be a PBH; this is because in brane cosmology (in which one extra dimension is extended) the Universe can be regarded as emerging
from a five-dimensional black hole. Although we cannot be certain that PBHs formed at all, research into their consequences potentially
probes four distinct areas of physics: (1) the early Universe (M < 1015 g); (2) gravitational collapse (M > 1015 g); (3) high-energy physics
(M ∼1015 g); (4) quantum gravity (M ∼10−5 g).
Early Work on PBH Formation, Accretion and Evaporation
The possibility of PBH formation emerges from two key density expressions: the cosmic density following the Big Bang, ρ ∼1/(Gt2), and
the critical density needed for an object to collapse within its Schwarzschild radius, ρ ∼c6/(G3M2). This implies an initial PBH mass:
M ∼c3t
G ∼1015 
t
10−23 s

g ,
(1)
this being of order the mass contained within the cosmic horizon at time t. This relation was used in a seminal paper by Hawking (1971),
in which he proposed that Planck-mass PBHs would carry electric charge, enabling them to capture electrons or protons to create atom-like
structures. He suggested these “atoms” might be detectable through tracks in bubble chambers and that they might also be concentrated in
stellar cores. Later, it was realised that such small black holes would lose their charge through quantum effects but the notion that PBHs
might be swallowed by stars has recently become topical.
Interestingly, an earlier analysis by Zel’dovich and Novikov (1967) had led them to conclude that such objects could not exist because
they would undergo runaway accretion. Their skepticism stemmed from a Bondi accretion calculation which suggested that PBHs formed
with the horizon mass (as expected) would grow at the same rate as the cosmic horizon, reaching 1017 M⊙by the end of the radiation-
dominated era. Since the existence of such huge black holes is precluded, this suggested that PBHs never formed. However, this argument
neglected the cosmic expansion, which is important for PBHs with the horizon size and would inhibit accretion. Later Carr and Hawking
(1974) showed that there is no solution in general relativity in which a black hole formed from local collapse can grow as fast as the cosmic
horizon. Furthermore, the black hole would soon become much smaller than the horizon, at which point the Bondi formula should apply
and implies that it should not grow much at all.
The removal of the concerns raised by Zeldovich–Novikov reinvigorated PBH research and led to Hawking’s revolutionary discovery
that black holes emit thermal radiation with a temperature:
TBH =
ℏc3
8πGMkB
∼10−7
 M
M⊙
!−1
K .
(2)
Primordial Black Holes
3
Fig. 1 This indicates the mass and size of various types of black holes, with the division between the micro and macro domains being
indicated by the vertical line. QSO stands for Quasi-Stellar Object, MW for Milky Way, IMBH for Intermediate Mass Black Hole, SLAB
for Stupendously Large Black Hole. Stellar black holes (SBHs) and supermassive black holes (SMBHs) occupy only the small slivers
shown in white, whereas PBHs occupy the much wider range shown in orange.
This results in their complete evaporation over a time:
τ(M) ≈5120 π G2 M3
ℏc4
∼1067
 M
M⊙
!3
yr .
(3)
PBHs of initial mass M∗∼1015 g, formed at 10−23 s with the size of a proton, would be completing their evaporation in the present era,
while less massive ones would have vanished earlier. However, PBHs heavier than Earth (1027 g) would be cooler than the CMB, causing
them to grow through accretion rather than shrink through evaporation. Hawking’s discovery has not yet been confirmed experimentally and
there remain major conceptual puzzles associated with the process. Nevertheless, it is generally recognised as one of the key developments
in 20th-century physics because it beautifully unifies general relativity, quantum mechanics and thermodynamics. The fact that Hawking
was only led to this discovery through contemplating the properties of PBHs illustrates that it has been useful to study them even if they
never actually formed.
This period also saw the emergence of more detailed models of PBH formation. The high density of the early Universe does not guarantee
PBH formation because one also needs density fluctuations, so that overdense regions can eventually stop expanding with the background.
However, only regions larger than the Jeans length at maximum expansion could collapse against the pressure. This is approximately √w
times the horizon scale for an equation of state is p = w ρ. For PBHs forming from Gaussian density fluctuations with root-mean-square
amplitude ϵ(M) at horizon crossing, this implies that the fraction of the Universe collapsing into PBHs of mass M should be (Carr, 1975)
β(M) ∼ϵ(M) exp
"
−
w2
2 ϵ(M)2
#
.
(4)
One expects w = 1/3 during the radiation-dominated era and it was initially expected that ϵ(M) should be scale-invariant. In this case, β
should also be scale-invariant and the PBH mass function should fall as M−5/2. However, as discussed later, this does not apply for the
fluctuations expected in the inflationary scenario since these are not exactly scale-invariant.
On cosmological scales the amplitude of the fluctuations at horizon crossing is around 10−5, so the exponential dependence in Eq. (4)
implies that the collapse fraction is tiny unless ϵ is much enhanced on small scales. Observations also require this since, if the current
density parameter of PBHs which form at redshift z is ΩPBH in units of the critical density, the initial collapse fraction must have been
β = ΩPBH
ΩR
(1 + z)−1 ∼10−6 ΩPBH
 t
s
1/2
∼10−18 ΩPBH
 
M
1015 g
!1/2
,
(5)
where ΩR ≈10−4 is the current density parameter of radiation and we have used Eq. (1) at the last step. The (1 + z) factor arises because
the radiation density scales as (1 + z)4, whereas the PBH density scales as (1 + z)3. So β must be tiny even if PBHs provide all of the dark
4
Primordial Black Holes
matter. This is a potential criticism of the PBH dark matter proposal, since it requires fine-tuning of β and even greater fine-tuning of ϵ.
There is also the puzzling feature that the PBH and baryon densities are very close if PBHs provide the dark matter, although (as discussed
later) there is one scenario in which this arises naturally.
The constraints on β(M) are particularly strong on the scales for which evaporation is important. Since PBHs with a mass of 1015 g
would be producing photons with energy of order 100 MeV at the present epoch, the observational limit on the γ-ray background intensity at
100 MeV immediately implies that their density could not exceed 10−8 times the critical density (Page and Hawking, 1976). This means that
there is little chance of detecting black hole explosions at the present epoch, which would have confirmed the existence of both PBHs and
Hawking radiation. Nevertheless, the evaporation of PBHs smaller than 1015 g could still have many interesting cosmological consequences,
each associated with a different type of emitted particle, and it also implied interesting constraints on the collapse fraction β(M).
The evaporation constraints were first brought together by Novikov et al. (1979). The strongest one is the γ-ray limit associated with
the 1015 g PBHs. Others are associated with the generation of entropy and modifications to the cosmological production of light elements,
PBHs with M ∼1010 g having a lifetime τ ∼103 s and therefore evaporating at the big bang nucleosynthesis (BBN) epoch. Injection of
high-energy neutrinos and antineutrinos changes the weak interaction freeze-out time and hence the neutron-to-proton ratio at the onset
of BBN, modifying 4He production. PBHs with M = 1010 – 1013 g evaporated after BBN, increasing the baryon-to-entropy ratio present
at nucleosynthesis and resulting in overproduction of 4He and underproduction of D. Emission of high-energy nucleons and antinucleons
increases the primordial deuterium abundance due to the capture of free neutrons by protons and spallation of 4He. The emission of photons
by PBHs with M > 1010 g dissociates the deuterons produced in nucleosynthesis. The associated constraints on β(M) are discussed later.
PBHs were also invoked to explain certain observations. For example, evaporating PBHs of around 1015 g might explain the 511 keV
annihilation line radiation from the Galactic centre or antiprotons in c