arXiv:2407.00456v2  [cs.SE]  21 Jun 2025
Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style
Inconsistencies in Large Language Models
YANLIN WANG, Sun Yat-sen University, China
TIANYUE JIANG, Sun Yat-sen University, China
MINGWEI LIU∗, Sun Yat-sen University, China
JIACHI CHEN, Sun Yat-sen University, China
MINGZHI MAO, Sun Yat-sen University, China
XILIN LIU, Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies, China
YUCHI MA, Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies, China
ZIBIN ZHENG, Sun Yat-sen University, China
Large language models (LLMs) have brought a paradigm shift to the field of code generation, offering the
potential to enhance the software development process. However, previous research mainly focuses on the
accuracy of code generation, while coding style differences between LLMs and human developers remain
under-explored. In this paper, we empirically analyze the differences in coding style between the code
generated by mainstream LLMs and the code written by human developers, and summarize coding style
inconsistency taxonomy. Specifically, we first summarize the types of coding style inconsistencies by manually
analyzing a large number of generation results. We then compare the code generated by LLMs with the code
written by human programmers in terms of readability, conciseness, and robustness. The results reveal that
LLMs and developers exhibit differences in coding style. Additionally, we study the possible causes of these
inconsistencies and provide some solutions to alleviate the problem.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering →Software evolution; Automatic programming.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Code generation, Coding style inconsistency, Large language models
ACM Reference Format:
Yanlin Wang, Tianyue Jiang, MingWei Liu, JiaChi Chen, MingZhi Mao, Xilin Liu, Yuchi Ma, and Zibin Zheng.
2025. Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style Inconsistencies in Large Language Models.
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 2, FSE, Article FSE032 (July 2025), 23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3715749
1
Introduction
Code generation is to automatically generate code snippets that align with given require-
ments, which plays a vital role in the software engineering domain [6, 8, 15, 23, 26–28, 31–
33, 38, 40, 50, 54, 62, 78, 85, 86, 89, 90, 93]. Recently, the advent of large language models [18, 39, 52],
such as CodeLlama [60], StarCoder [39], Codex [56] and GPT-4 [2], has greatly advanced the
∗Corresponding Author
Authors’ Contact Information: Yanlin Wang, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China, wangylin36@mail.sysu.edu.cn; Tianyue
Jiang, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China, jiangty9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; MingWei Liu, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai,
China, liumw26@mail.sysu.edu.cn; JiaChi Chen, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China, liumw26@mail.sysu.edu.cn; MingZhi
Mao, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China, mcsmmz@mail.sysu.edu.cn; Xilin Liu, Huawei Cloud Computing Technolo-
gies, Shenzhen, China, liuxilin3@huawei.com; Yuchi Ma, Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies, Shenzhen, China,
mayuchi1@huawei.com; Zibin Zheng, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China, zhzibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses,
contact the owner/author(s).
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM 2994-970X/2025/7-ARTFSE032
https://doi.org/10.1145/3715749
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE032:2
Wang et al.
performance of code generation. These models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in code
generation, significantly enhancing software development efficiency [94]. However, while previous
studies primarily focus on enhancing the accuracy of LLM-based code generation, an equally
important aspect—coding style—remains under-explored. Understanding the differences in coding
style between LLMs and human developers is essential, as it directly impacts code readability,
maintainability, and overall software quality [49].
There are several previous works related to coding style [9, 48, 49, 55, 57]. Oman et al. [55]
proposed a programming style taxonomy, including typographic style, control structure style, and
information structure style. However, some of these guidelines are outdated, such as the use of
Goto statements, which are now rarely used in modern programming. To improve code formatting
style, tools like CODEBUFF [57], an automatic code formatter, and STYLE-ANALYZER [48], which
fixes formatting inconsistencies, have been developed. Mi et al. [49] expanded the scope by using
hierarchical agglomerative clustering to measure stylistic inconsistency, considering not only
formatting but also stylistic metrics related to code readability and features specific to the C/C++
programming languages. More recently, DUETCS [9] was proposed for coding style transfer.
This work considers a broader range of coding style features, categorizing them into text style
(formatting and naming conventions) and structure style (code blocks ordering and preferences
of control flow statements). These works provide a preliminary foundation and inspiration for
examining coding styles. In our work, we adopt the definition of code style in previous
research [7, 49, 55, 80]: Code style can be understood as a personal habit in writing source
code, reflecting individual preferences in aspects like physical layout, algorithms, etc.
However, there remain several gaps. (i) Existing work offers a generalized definition of code style
but lacks detailed and comprehensive classification. (ii) No existing studies have yet analyzed the
differences in coding style between mainstreams LLMs and human developers. (iii) A comparative
analysis of coding styles across different LLMs is still missing.
In this paper, our aim is to fill these gaps. 1○Firstly, we conduct extensive manual analysis to
categorize various types of coding style inconsistencies. We compare the code generation results
of five mainstream LLMs, including four Code LLMs and a state-of-the-art general-purpose LLM
(GPT-4 [2]), against the ground truths of CoderEval [81] benchmark. We annotate the results
and perform open coding to develop a comprehensive taxonomy of coding style inconsistencies,
achieving a detailed classification of code style, which addresses (i) and (ii). 1 2○Secondly, we
analyze the distribution of inconsistencies, including ratios, frequencies, and differences across the
five LLMs, addressing (iii). 3○Thirdly, we compare the generated code with human-written code
based on readability, conciseness, and robustness. 4○Finally, we experiment on several prompting
strategies to explore methods to improve the coding style of LLMs.
Through extensive experiments and evaluation, we have obtained the following results: 1 We
propose the first taxonomy of coding style inconsistencies in LLM-generated code. The taxonomy
contains 24 inconsistency types, categorized into five dimensions, i.e., Formatting Inconsistency,
Semantic Inconsistency, Expression/Statement Inconsistency, Control Follow Inconsistency, and Fault
Tolerance Inconsistency. 2 Our analysis reveals significant style inconsistencies between human-
written code and all studied LLMs, particularly in statements/expressions and formatting. Coding
styles among the LLMs themselves are generally similar, with some variation in formatting. 3
Overall, LLM-generated code is comparable to human-written code in terms of readability, con-
ciseness, and robustness. 4 Certain prompt strategies can marginally improve the readability and
robustness of generated code, but there is a trade-off with conciseness. This suggests that while
prompt engineering can help, it may not fully resolve coding style issues and can sometimes reduce
1In this paper, we use “coding style inconsistency”, “style inconsistency”, and “inconsistency” interchangeably.
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style Inconsistencies in Large Language Models
FSE032:3
code accuracy. 5 Our case studies show that LLM-generated code often exhibits poor formatting,
lacks familiarity with basic Python functions, and underutilizes advanced syntax features, making
the code less readable, concise, and efficient.
We summarize the main contributions of this paper as follows:
• We provide a comprehensive taxonomy of coding style inconsistencies between LLMs and
human developers. Compared to previous work, our proposed taxonomy achieves a more
detailed classification of coding styles.
• We conduct extensive analysis to reveal the coding style inconsistencies of several mainstream
LLMs, leading to a deeper understanding of LLM-based code generation.
• We propose some practical solutions to improve the inconsistencies of the coding style,
paving the way for a more harmonious integration of LLM and coding practices.
2
Related Work
2.1
LLM-based Code Generation
Code LLMs, such as StarCoder [39], CodeLlama [60], and DeepSeek-Coder [18], are specifically
optimized for code-centric tasks [92, 94], leveraging massive code-specific corpora and specialized
training instructions. The most state-of-the-art general-purpose large model, GPT-4, due to its
significantly larger number of parameters compared to other Code LLMs, demonstrates outstanding
performance on code-centric tasks. In recent years, some works have studied the application of LLMs
in fields such as vulnerability detection [12, 68, 75, 79, 84], commit message generation [46, 47, 69, 91],
unit test generation [61, 63, 77, 83], code search [17, 22, 30, 42, 72], code summarization [3, 21, 37,
65, 66, 73] and code generation [20, 24, 25, 36, 41, 43, 45, 51, 67, 70, 71, 74, 76, 82, 95], etc.
To understand the code generation performance of LLMs, some high-quality code generation
benchmarks have been proposed in recent years. For example, HumanEval [10], MBPP [4] and
ClassEval [16], covering different scenarios such as repository-level code generation [34, 35, 58, 87]
and class-level code generation tasks [16]. While most studies are primarily concerned with
improving the functional correctness of code generated by models, using metrics like passk [10],
recent research has begun to explore other attributes of code generated by LLMs. For instance,
methods have been proposed to enhance the robustness of LLMs [11, 88], and attention has been
given to the security aspects of LLMs in code generation tasks, investigating potential vulnerabilities
and risks [14, 53].
In contrast to previous works, our investigation is on the code style of LLMs. We conduct the
first study to compare the code style of several mainstream LLMs with code written by human
programmers. Additionally, we compare the code styles among different mainstream LLMs. This
analysis provides insights into the strengths and weaknesses of LLMs in terms of coding style,
shedding light on potential areas for improvement and future research directions.
2.2
Coding Style
In previous work [55], Oman et al. proposed a programming style taxonomy, encompassing typo-
graphic style, control structure style, and information structure style, which laid the foundation
for the development of programming style guidelines and analyzers. However, certain rules in
this taxonomy may now be considered outdated and may not fully reflect modern programming
practices and conventions (For instance, the example rules mentioning the use of Goto statements
are no longer widely used in contemporary programming). Recent strides in coding style research
include innovations like CODEBUFF [57], an automatic code formatter that leverages machine learn-
ing to understand and apply code formatting styles. Similarly, STYLE-ANALYZER [48] addresses
code formatting inconsistencies using a decision tree forest model. However, both CODEBUFF
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE032:4
Wang et al.
and STYLE-ANALYZER focus solely on formatting style. Mi et al. [49] employed hierarchical
agglomerative clustering to gauge code style inconsistencies, focusing on C/C++ languages. In a
recent study [9], DUETCS extracted comprehensive code style features from target code examples,
covering text and structure style elements. DUETCS utilizes a Siamese feature network to transform
source code style into that of target examples while preserving semantic integrity.
In our study, we adopt the definition of code style provided by earlier works [7, 49, 55, 80]: Code
style can be understood as a personal writing habit in source code, reflecting individual preferences
in aspects like physical layout, algorithms, and more. While previous research offers a generalized
definition of code style, the classification of code style lacks sufficient detail and comprehensiveness.
To address this gap, we conducted open coding on code samples generated by several mainstream
LLMs. This process result a coding style inconsistency taxonomy comprising 5 dimensions and 24
distinct inconsistency types, offering a comprehensive classification for code style. In comparison
to prior efforts, our proposed taxonomy of code style inconsistencies is more comprehensive and
detailed, extending beyond traditional focus on text style and structure style. Moreover, our study
lays the groundwork for future research on the coding style of LLMs, offering valuable insights
and avenues for further exploration in this domain.
3
Experimental Setup
In this section, we introduce the experimental setup, including the LLM selection, benchmark
selection, and implementation details.
3.1
LLM Selection
We select five LLMs for our experiments, including four well-known Code LLMs (CodeLlama-
7B [60], StarCoder2-7B [39], DeepSeekCoder-1.3B [19], and DeepSeekCoder-6.7B [19]) and the
state-of-the-art general-purpose model, GPT-4 [2]. The rationale behind choosing these four Code
LLMs is their demonstrated strong performance in code generation tasks. As for GPT-4, it is chosen
due to its status as the most effective and parameter-intensive model. The four selected code LLMs
are base models without instruction-tuning, making them particularly well-suited for our code
generation scenario, where the objective is to generate code based on the provided context.
3.2
Benchmark Selection
Our experiments are conducted on CoderEval [81], which is a benchmark used to evaluate code
generation performance on pragmatic code generation tasks, i.e., code generation with repository
context. It consists of 230 Python and 230 Java tasks from real-world open-source projects. Each
task contains a function signature2, a task description, a solution code as the ground truth, and
several unit tests to assess the functional correctness of the generated code. It is worth noting that
the repositories to which these Python tasks belong do not have specific requirements for
code style. The objective of each task is to complete the code specified by the function signature,
guided by the provided task description, and ensure that it passes the associated unit tests. In this
study, we focus on Python tasks due to Python’s popularity [64] and its alignment with previous
code generation work [5].
3.3
Implementation Details
During the inference stage, for the four Code LLMs, we employ a random sampling strategy, setting
the maximum context length to 1,024 and the temperature to 0.8. For GPT-4, we adopted identical
hyperparameter settings. The choices for maximum context length and temperature are aligned
2We use “method” and “function” interchangeably in this paper.
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style Inconsistencies in Large Language Models
FSE032:5
with the experimental setup used in CoderEval [81]. All experiments are conducted on a machine
with 216 GB of RAM and a Tesla A100 GPU with 80 GB of memory.
4
Evaluation
In this section, we report and analyze the experimental results to answer the following research
questions (RQs):
• RQ1: What are the types of coding style inconsistencies between the selected LLMs and
human?
• RQ2: What is the distribution of the coding style inconsistencies?
– RQ2.a: What are the percentages of inconsistent coding style for different models?
– RQ2.b: What are the inconsistency type numbers present between a single code sample
and the corresponding ground truth?
– RQ2.c: What are the distribution of coding style inconsistency types for models?
• RQ3: How do model-generated code and human-written code compare in three aspects:
readability, conciseness, and robustness?
• RQ4: Can prompting techniques improve the coding style of LLMs?
4.1
RQ1: Coding Style Inconsistency Identification
To identify the inconsistencies in coding styles between LLMs and human programmers, we
manually analyze the generated results of the five LLMs. It’s worth noting that human-written
code does not always equate to good coding style. Therefore, we do not use human-written
code as a standard to assess the quality of coding style in LLM-generated code. Instead,
we focus solely on analyzing the coding style inconsistencies between human-written
code and LLM-generated code. By comparing these generated results with the ground truths,
we summarize the types of coding style inconsistencies. We conduct open coding [29] on the
code generated by LLMs. Initially, we describe the data collection process, followed by a detailed
explanation of the coding protocol.
4.1.1
Data Collection. Our data collection process includes three steps: model generation, auto-
matic filtering, and manual filtering.
Model generation. For each of the 230 Python code generation tasks from CoderEval [81], we
prompt the five LLMs to perform code generation using the same prompting template. For each
task, we instruct each model to generate 10 results, resulting in an initial total of 2,300 code samples
for each model.
Automatic filtering. To ensure the correctness of the collected code samples, we further filter
out code samples that fail to pass any of the associated unit tests for the task, leading to 456, 189,
365, 497 and 570 results that pass all tests for five LLMs, respectively. We further merge identical
code samples to reduce analysis effort, resulting in 1,557 unique code samples. We only annotate
these unique code samples to ensure that the annotation results for the same code sample generated
by different models are consistent, thereby avoiding the situation where the same code sample
generated by different LLMs is annotated with different results.
Manual filtering. To ensure the quality of collected code samples, we manually check and filter
them based on three criteria: 1 Style consistency. We filter out results that exhibit no inconsistency
in coding style. If the naming conventions, commenting style, code structure, and other aspects of
the two code samples are consistent, we conclude that there is no significant difference in code style
between them. For example, Figure 1 shows an example of consistent coding style between the
code sample generated by Code LLM and corresponding ground truth. As a result, 73 code samples
are filtered out in this way. 2 Functional correctness. We filter out results that implement the task
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE032:6
Wang et al.
Ground truth
LLM generation
def match_pubdate(node, pubdate_xpaths):
    # docstring
    for xpath in pubdate_xpaths:
        pubdate = node.find(xpath)
        if pubdate is not None:
            return pubdate
def match_pubdate(node, pubdate_xpaths):
    # docstring
    for path in pubdate_xpaths:
        pubdate = node.find(path)
        if pubdate is not None:
            return pubdate
    return None
Docstring 
''' for the given node, return  the first match in the 
pubdate_xpaths list. '''
Fig. 1. An Example of Style-Consistent Implemen-
tation.
Ground truth
LLM generation
Docstring 
''' If available, return the C optimization module, 
otherwise a false value.'''
def _c_optimizations_required():
    # docstring
    pure_env = os.environ.get('PURE_PYTHON')
    require_c = pure_env == "0"
    return require_c
def _c_optimizations_required():
    # docstring
    return False
Incorrect  
Implementation
Fig. 2. An Example of Incorrect Implementation
that Passed Unit Tests.
incorrectly despite passing the unit tests. Previous work has shown that existing benchmarks
suffer from test sufficiency issues, meaning that even if a generated result passes all tests, there
is still a chance it could be incorrect [44]. For example, Figure 2 shows an example of wrong
implementation although passing test cases. As a result, 286 code samples are filtered out in this
way. 3 Implementation conciseness. We filter out results that contain extra code that does not
contribute to fulfilling the function’s implementation requirements (e.g., two exactly the same
loops). As a result, 19 code samples are filtered out in this way. Finally, we obtain 1,179 unique code
samples for the study.
4.1.2
Data Annotation. We adopt classifications of coding style inconsistencies in previous work [9]
as the initialization of our classification and conduct open coding [29] on the code samples generated
by LLMs. Our objective is to refine and expand these classifications to capture detailed instances
of coding style inconsistencies. In our annotation process, three annotators were involved,
each with over five years of Python programming experience and a solid understanding
of the field of code style.
Iterative coding. The three annotators independently analyze the code samples one by one.
For each code sample, the annotators independently compare it with the ground truth line by
line to identify inconsistencies, without knowing which model produced the result. If a code
sample and its corresponding ground truth show inconsistency that matches a current definition of
inconsistency type, the annotators code the generated result with the specific inconsistency type.
If the inconsistency does not fit any existing definitions, the annotators either modify an existing
definition or create a new type. When the inconsistency types are updated, all code samples will
be re-annotated to ensure consistency. Note that a code sample can be classified under multiple
inconsistency types. For example, if a code sample follows a different naming convention (Naming
Formatting Inconsistency) and also structures loops differently (Loop Structure Inconsistency), it
will be annotated with both inconsistency types.
This iterative coding process aims to capture the nuanced nature of coding style inconsistencies.
During the coding process, the annotators also summarize guidelines for each inconsistency type
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style Inconsistencies in Large Language Models
FSE032:7
annotation to ensure clarity and consistency in our annotations. These guidelines include specific
examples and detailed descriptions to help identify and classify each type of inconsistency accurately.
This ensures the annotation consistency and the reproducibility across different coders.
Periodic review and update. After analyzing every 50 code samples, the three annotators
conduct a review of both the taxonomy and the coded samples. Based on insights from the review
and discussions, we refine the definitions of inconsistency types, merging or removing types as
necessary. Following any updates to the taxonomy, all code samples are re-annotated to maintain
consistency and accuracy in the categorization of inconsistencies. This periodic review and update
process continues until all code samples have been fully coded, ensuring thorough and reliable
identification of coding style inconsistencies. Note that the taxonomy has remained stable during
the last several reviews, indicating a mature and robust classification system. We calculated that the
average disagreement rate among the three annotators was 37.6% after labeling every 50 samples.
However, these disagreements were resolved through discussions among the annotators.
4.1.3
Taxonomy. Table 1 presents the 24 inconsistency types identified during the open coding,
along with their names and definitions. For each inconsistency type, the full annotation results and
detailed annotation guidelines are included in our replication package [1].
Taxonomy Analysis. We have further categorized the 24 types of inconsistencies into five
dimensions based on their main focus:
• Formatting Inconsistency. This dimension focuses on inconsistencies related to code
formatting, such as indentation, spacing, and code/comment layout.
• Semantic Inconsistency. This dimension focuses on inconsistencies related to the meaning
or semantics of code, including variable naming, function naming, and the level of detail in
comment style.
• Expression/Statement Inconsistency. This dimension focuses on inconsistencies related
to the style or usage of expressions and statements within the code, such as assignment styles,
conditional expressions, and data structure construction.
• Control Follow Inconsistency. This dimension focuses on inconsistencies related to control
flow structures within the code, such as conditional statements, loop structures, and exception
handling.
• Fault Tolerance Inconsistency. This dimension focuses on inconsistencies related to error
handling and fault tolerance mechanisms within the code, including input validation, runtime
validation, and exception handling.
It is worth noting that we have categorized 24 inconsistency types into 5 dimensions, with
the scope of code style inconsistencies contained in each dimension solely determined by the
inconsistency types assigned to that dimension. Since there is no obvious overlap between the
inconsistency types, there is also no clear overlap between the 5 dimensions.
Figure 3 provides a visual representation of the relationships between the five dimensions and the
24 inconsistency types identified. The inconsistency types are organized into a tree-like structure
in the figure, with the dimensions and inconsistency types represented using different shapes,
connected by lines. Furthermore, these inconsistencies vary in their scopes of influence, such as
identifier, statement, and block, as also depicted in Figure 3. Some inconsistencies may belong
to only one or a few identifiers (e.g., Naming Formatting Inconsistency) or a single statement
(e.g., Assignment Style Inconsistency), while others may impact an entire block of code (e.g., Loop
Structure Inconsistency) or span across multiple blocks (e.g., Code Order Inconsistency).
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE032:8
Wang et al.
Table 1. Coding Style Inconsistency taxonomy.
ID
Inconsistency Type
Definition
1
Naming Format Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the formatting of identifiers (e.g., variable names, function names,
or parameter names), such as using camelCase (e.g., authorName) versus snake_case
(e.g., author_name).
2
Space Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the use of space(e.g., whitespace and indentation) around various
syntactical elements, e.g., operators, colons, comments, and brackets.
3
Blank Line Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the use of blank lines. For example, one style includes blank
lines to separate code blocks, while the other omits them.
4
Inline Code Usage Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the usage of inline code constructs. It encompasses cases where
one approach employs inline expressions or functions while the other does not.
5
Comment Format Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the formatting of comments within code. It includes variations in
interline comments, inline comments, commented-out code, and trailing comments.
6
Statement Organization Inconsistency
Inconsistency in the organization style of statements, exemplified by completing
expressions or statements in a single line in contrast to breaking them into multiple
shorter lines.
7
Naming Semantics Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the semantic meaning of identifiers, such as using generic single-
letter identifiers (e.g., i, l, d) versus meaningful, descriptive words (e.g., index, length,
day).
8
Comment Semantics Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the semantic aspects of comments within code, such as variations
in the level of detail or semantic differences, or with TODO comment, useless
comments.
9
Assignment Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the style of variable assignment, e.g., tuple unpacking assignment,
chained assignment, separate assignment. Examples include using augmented
assignment versus standard assignment (e.g., ‘x += 1‘ vs. ‘x = x + 1‘).
10
Conditional Syntax Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the syntax used for conditional statements within code. It covers
scenarios where one method involves conditional statements while the other em-
ploys conditional expressions or return statements with equivalent functionality.
11
Conditional Expression Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the way conditional expressions are written, despite having
similar functionalities. For example, one style might use if len(a) > 1 while another
uses if len(a) >= 2.
12
Data Structure Construction Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the methods used to construct data structures such as lists,
dictionaries, sets, tuples, strings, and iterators. For example, using different syntaxes
or functions to create these data structures.
13
API Preference Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in how APIs are used to achieve similar functionality. It includes
variations such as calling different functions or methods defined in the repository,
using built-in functions, or re-implementing the functionality without calling
existing functions.
14
Advanced Syntax Usage Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the use of advanced syntax features, such as lambda expressions
15
Code Ordering Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the order of semantically similar code blocks, such as import
statements, assignments, loops, and other logical sections of code.
16
Loop Structure Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in loop structures within code. It covers scenarios where one
approach employs a for loop while the other uses a while loop, or where one loop
contains only a basic loop structure while the other includes additional control
flow statements such as if-break, for-else structure, and while-else structure
17
Conditional Structure Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the structure and design of conditional statements within meth-
ods. It includes variances such as the use of multiple conditional statements versus a
single statement with equivalent meaning, differences in the structures of multiple
conditional statements while preserving the same semantics, and disparities in the
inclusion of return statements alongside conditional statements.
18
Control Flow Structure Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the use of control flow structures, such as using if-else versus try-
except statements during the code execution (e.g., input and runtime validation).
19
Input Validation Presence Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in whether input checking with conditionals is performed.
20
Runtime Validation Presence Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in whether runtime validation with conditionals is performed,
ensuring data integrity during code execution..
21
Exception Handling Presence Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in whether exceptions are handled, e.g., using try-except blocks, to
manage errors that occur during execution.
22
Input Validation Style Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the style of input validation with conditionals (ensuring input
data is checked before processing), such as whether exceptions are thrown, the
types of exceptions used, and the use of logging.
23
Runtime Validation Style Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the style of runtime validation with conditionals during code
execution, such as whether exceptions are thrown, the types of exceptions used,
and the use of logging.
24
Exception Handling Style Inconsistency
Inconsistencies in the style of exceptions that occur during execution are handled,
such as whether exceptions are thrown, the types of exceptions used, and the use
of logging, the use of try-else block.
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style Inconsistencies in Large Language Models
FSE032:9
Statement Organization
Naming Formatting 
Space 
Blank Line
Comment Formatting
Inline Code Usage
Naming Semantic
Comment Semantic
Data Structure Construction
Assignment
Conditional Expression
Conditional Syntax
API Preference
Code Ordering
Conditional Structure
Loop Structure
Control Flow Structure
Input Validation Presence
Runtime Validation Presence
Exception Handling Presence
Input Validation Style
Runtime Validation Style
Exception Handling Style
Formatting
Control Flow
Semantic
Expression/
Statement
Fault Tolerance
Coding Style Inconsistency Type
Advanced Syntax Usage
Fig. 3. Dimensions and Corresponding Coding Style Inconsistency Types.
Note that certain inconsistencies could affect both statement and block structures, contingent
upon the complexity of the code involved. For instance, in the context of API preference inconsis-
tency, the implementation of the same functionality may vary. It could involve calling different
single APIs within a statement, or it might require the coordination of several APIs with specific
usage patterns across multiple code blocks.
Taxonomy Comparison. Compared with the coding style taxonomy of Chen et al. [9], they
categorize coding styles into text style and structure style, with four subtypes formatting, naming,
ordering of code blocks, and control structures. Our taxonomy covers all these types and introduces
three additional dimensions: semantic, expression/statement, and fault tolerance. We expand upon
their framework by introducing 24 fine-grained types compared to 4 types. For instance, we refine
their subtype Control Structures into three specific inconsistency types related to: Conditional
Structure Inconsistency, Loop Structure Inconsistency, and Control Flow Structure Inconsistency,
offering a more detailed classification. Our taxonomy is backed by comprehensive guidelines
derived from actual open coding, providing detailed and actionable classifications.
Taxonomy Generalizability. One concern is that, since each task in CoderEval has only
one ground truth, this may reflect the coding style of a single programmer, potentially limiting
the generalizability of our taxonomy. To this end, we randomly selecting 42 Python tasks from
the 230 available in CoderEval and two annotators were assigned to independently rewrite the
ground truths for these 42 tasks, resulting in a total of 84 ground truths. Another annotator was
responsible for verifying the correctness of these ground truths. We then identified the code samples
corresponding to these 42 tasks from a set of 1,179 unique code samples and annotated the coding
style differences between the rewritten ground truths and the code samples following the outlined
annotation process. Both the rewritten ground truths and the annotation results are available in our
replication package [1]. After the annotation process, the overall taxonomy remained unchanged.
In summary, our taxonomy not only complements but also substantially enhances previous
research, filling critical gaps and offering a more robust framework for analyzing the inconsistencies
in coding style. Note that while our taxonomy is based on summarizing inconsistencies observed
in Python code generated by LLMs, it is not limited to Python alone. The concepts and categories
can be generalized to other programming languages as needed.
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE032:10
Wang et al.
CodeLlama-7B StarCoder2-7B
DSC-1.3B
DSC-6.7B
GPT-4
0
100
200
300
400
500
Number of samples
66.2%
33.8%
391
82.4%
17.6%
142
88.4%
11.6%
277
89.9%
10.1%
375
90.1%
9.9%
537
Coding Style Inconsistencies
Coding Style Consistencies
Fig. 4. Percentages of Inconsistent Coding Styles.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
The number of inconsistency types
0
10
20
30
40
Frequency (%)
CodeLlama-7B
StarCoder2-7B
DeepSeekCoder-1.3B
DeepSeekCoder-6.7B
GPT-4
Fig. 5. Inconsistency Numbers in a Single Code Sam-
ple.
RQ1 Summary: We have identified 24 types of coding style inconsistencies and categorized
them into five dimensions: Formatting, Semantic, Expression/Statement, Control Flow, and
Fault Tolerance. Our taxonomy expands upon previous work by introducing new dimensions
and providing more detailed classifications with guidelines.
4.2
RQ2: Coding Style Inconsistency Analysis
We design RQ2 to evaluate the differences between human-written code and LLM-generated code.
Specifically, we investigate the coding style differences in three perspectives: (1) Percentages of
inconsistent coding styles; (2) Inconsistency numbers present in a single code sample; and (3)
Distribution of coding style inconsistency types.
4.2.1
Percentages of Inconsistent Coding Styles. We counted the number of code samples generated
by the five models (CodeLlama-7B, StarCoder2-7B, DeepSeekCoder-1.3B, DeepSeekCoder-6.7B,
and GPT-4) that passed unit tests, were manually verified for functional correctness, and did not
contain extra code. The results were 391, 142, 277, 375, and 537, respectively. Furthermore, we
calculated the proportion of these code samples that either exhibit or do not exhibit coding style
inconsistencies compared to human-written code. The statistical results are shown in Figure 4.
From Figure 4, we can find that all LLMs exhibit coding style inconsistency with human-written
code and the degree varies: 66.2%, 82.4%, 88.5%, 89.9% and 90.1% for the five models, respectively.
4.2.2
Inconsistency Numbers Present in a Single Code Sample. For each model, we counted the
number of inconsistency types present in each code sample (considering only the code samples
that exhibit coding style differences with the corresponding ground truths). Then, We counted
the frequency of different numbers of inconsistent types in one sample for each model. A line
chart was plotted based on the frequency of inconsistency types present in the code samples.
From Figure 5, it can be seen that the number of inconsistent types for one code sample ranges
between 1 and 8. For each model, the trend of the frequency line chart is roughly the same, with
all lines generally showing a decreasing trend. The code samples of CodeLlama-7B, StarCoder2-
7B, DeepSeekCoder-1.3B, and DeepSeekCoder-6.7B show the highest frequency of having one
inconsistency type, at 39.8%, 32.5%, 35.9%, and 37.8%, respectively. The code samples of GPT-4
exhibit the highest frequency of two inconsistency types, at 31.8%. The lowest frequency is that
code samples with 8 inconsistency types, at 0.0%, 0.0%, 0.8%, 0.3% and 0.0%, respectively.
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style Inconsistencies in Large Language Models
FSE032:11
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Frequency(%)
Comment Semantics
Loop Structure
Runtime Validation Style
Space
Input Validation Style
Statement Organization
Assignment
Runtime Validation Presence
Exception Handling Style
Code Ordering
Control Flow Structure
Advanced Syntax Usage
Naming Semantics
Exception Handling Presence
Conditional Structure
Conditional Syntax
Input Validation Presence
Naming Format
Conditional Expression
Inline Code Usage
Data Structure Construction
Blank Line
Comment Format 
API Preference
Inconsistency Types
CodeLlama-7B
StarCoder2-7B
DeepSeekCoder-1.3B
DeepSeekCoder-6.7B
GPT-4
Fig. 6. Overall Distribution of Coding Style Inconsistency Types.
Naming Format
Space
Statement Organization
Blank Line
Comment Format
Inline Code Usage
Semantics
Comment Semantics
API Preference
Assignment
Conditional Expression
Conditional Syntax
Data Structure Construction
Conditional Structure
Code Ordering
Conditional Structure
Loop Structure
Control Flow Presence Runtime Validation Presence
Exception Handling Presence
Input Validation Style
Runtime Validation Style
Exception Handling Style
10
40
80
CodeLlama-7B
StarCoder2-7B
DeepSeekCoder-1.3B
DeepSeekCoder-6.7B
GPT-4
Fig. 7. Breakdown Distribution of Coding Style Inconsis-
tency (by Model). The “Semantics” at the top refers to “Nam-
ing Semantics”, and the “Presence”at the bottom refers to
“Input Validation Presence”.
Formatting
Semantic
Expression/Statement
Control Flow
Fault Tolerance
1
10
20
40 6080
CodeLlama-7B
StarCoder2-7B
DeepSeekCoder-1.3B
DeepSeekCoder-6.7B
GPT-4
Fig. 8. Breakdown Distribution of Coding Style
Inconsistency (by Dimension).
4.2.3
Distribution of Coding Style Inconsistency Types. Figure 6 is a stacked plot showing the
frequencies of a certain inconsistency type in code samples generated by five models. For example,
the frequencies of API Preference inconsistency in the code samples generated by CodeLlama-7B,
StarCoder2-7B, DeepSeekCoder-1.3B, DeepSeekCoder-6.7B, and GPT-4 are 70.7%, 63.3%, 72.7%,
64.1%, and 54.4%, respectively, summing up to 325.0%. We can observe that the top-4 inconsistency
types are API Preference Inconsistency (325.0%), Comment Formatting Inconsistency (126.3%),
Blank Line Inconsistency (126.1%) and Data Structure Construction Inconsistency (97.4%). Among
these top four inconsistency types, API Preference Inconsistency stands out with a significantly
higher frequency, even surpassing the combined frequencies of the second and third-ranked types.
In contrast, the bottom inconsistency types are: Runtime Validation Style (9.7%), Loop Structure
(7.4%), Comment Semantic (2.5%). The low frequencies of these types indicate that LLMs and
human-written code are relatively consistent in these aspects.
In order to understand the inconsistencies deeper, we conducted a detailed analysis of the top-
4 inconsistency types. In our observed code samples and the ground truths, we found that the
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE032:12
Wang et al.
code samples and the ground truths might call functions from different sources to achieve similar
functionality. Different sources refer to functions that may be defined within the original repository,
built-in Python functions, etc. For example, we found that in 6.6% of cases, the ground truth calls
functions defined in the original repository while similar functionality is achieved using Python
built-in functions, etc., in the code samples generated by models. This may be because the model
lacks contextual information about the functions defined in the original repository when generating
code. As a result, the large model uses built-in functions or third-party library functions, etc., to
achieve similar functionality. For instance, in one task, the ground truth uses a function defined in
the original repository, “match_file_by_prefix(prefix, file)”, to check if the prefix of the file name is
“prefix”, while the code sample generated by models uses the built-in method in Python “startswith”
to achieve similar functionality.
Comment Format Inconsistency and Blank Lines Inconsistency are the second and third most
frequent inconsistency types. In our analysis, we found that model-generated code samples tend to
avoid using blank lines to separate code blocks compared to human-written code. The five models
generally have a high frequency of Comment Formatting inconsistency, but there are differences
among them (The highest frequency is observed for GPT-4 at 39.5%. StarCoder2-7B follows with
35.9%, and CodeLlama-7B ranks third at 23.6%. DeepSeekCoder-1.3B and DeepSeekCoder-6.7B have
the lowest frequencies, recorded at 14.3% and 13.1%, respectively.). Among these models, GPT-4
has the highest frequency, partly because it includes more meaningful block and inline comments
compared to human-written code. The other four models are less inclined to add such comments.
Notably, code samples from CodeLlama-7B, StarCoder2-7B, and DeepSeekCoder-1.3B even do not
include any examples containing inline comments. The relatively high frequency of StarCoder2-7B
and CodeLlama-7B can be attributed to their less standardized comment formatting compared to
the other models. For example, the code samples generated by CodeLlama-7B and StarCoder2-7B
may contain commented-out code or TODO comments, while the code samples generated by
DeepSeekCoder-1.3B, DeepSeekCoder-6.7B and GPT-4 do not. We consider that having commented-
out code in code is not good coding practice because these comments are unnecessary information
and do not help in understanding the functionality of the code. We believe that including TODO
comments in code generated by large models is not good coding practice. This is because we expect
large models to produce complete code based on requirements, rather than including comments
indicating unfinished tasks or future improvements. Data structure construction inconsistency
is a frequently occurring type of inconsistency. The code samples and the corresponding ground
truths may show differences in constructing data structures (e.g., list, set). In our observed samples,
human programmers tend to prefer using list comprehensions to construct lists, whereas the code
samples generated by LLMs tends to favor conventional methods for constructing lists.
Figure 7 shows a radar chart of the frequency of inconsistency types for five different models,
allowing us to compare the overall frequency distribution of inconsistency types across these
models. As shown in Figure 7, the distribution of inconsistency types for DeepSeekCoder-1.3B and
DeepSeekCoder-6.7B is relatively similar compared to the other models in terms of inconsistency
types such as comment format, conditional expression, and naming format, etc. For example, in the
Inline Code Usage inconsistency type, the frequency for DeepSeekCoder-1.3B and DeepSeekCoder-
6.7B is very close, lower than the frequency for GPT-4, but higher than that for CodeLlama-7B
and StarCoder2-7B. The frequencies of DeepSeekCoder-1.3B, DeepSeekCoder-6.7B, and GPT-4
are higher because they tend to include more intermediate variables in the code compared to the
ground truths. Therefore, we can conclude that the base model significantly influences the coding
style. The training data and method have a more noticeable impact on the coding style of the model
compared to the parameters.
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style Inconsistencies in Large Language Models
FSE032:13
Written by programmer A
Written by programmer B 
def func_A(input):
    result = 10 / input
def func_B(input):
    try:
        result = 10 / input
    except ZeroDivisionError:
        print("Error: Division by zero.")
Exception  handling 
mechanism
Fig. 9. An example of how robustness relates to code
style.
Ground truth
Generated by GPT-4 
Intermediate variable
def parse_version(s: str):
    # docstring
    return tuple(int(p) for p in s.split('.'))
def parse_version(s: str):
   # Split the string by dot
   parts = s.split('.')
   # Convert each part to an integer
   return tuple(int(parts) for part in parts)
Fig. 10. An example of generated code being less
concise than Human-Written code.
Figure 8 presents a radar chart that summarizes coding style inconsistencies by grouping them
into five broader dimensions, i.e., formatting, semantic, expression/statement, control flow, and fault
tolerance. To calculate the frequency for each dimension, we sum the instances of inconsistency
types belonging to that dimension and divide it by the total number of valid code samples. From
Figure 8, we have the following observations:
• It is evident that the coding styles of different LLMs are similar in dimension granularity.
This is indicated by the almost overlapping shapes on the radar chart, highlighting that these
models share a similar distribution of inconsistency types by dimension.
• The dimensions, ranked by average frequency of inconsistencies, are as follows: statemen-
t/expression (73.1%), formatting (52.4%), fault tolerance (24.3%), control flow (18.0%), and
semantic(7.5%). The high ranking of statement/expression inconsistency is primarily due to
the significantly high frequency of API Preference Inconsistency within this dimension.
• We then calculate the difference between the highest and lowest values of frequency of
inconsistencies for each dimension. We sort the five dimensions from high to low according
to the difference, and the result is: formatting (20.5%), semantic (7.3%), statement/expression
(7.2%), fault tolerance (7.2%), and control flow (6.0%). This is because, although the training
data of the models is generally similar, there are still some differences.
RQ2 Summary: There are obvious coding style inconsistencies between human and all the
studied LLMs. The top inconsistency type is API preference and top inconsistency dimensions
are statements/expressions and formatting dimensions. While LLMs generally have similar
coding styles, there are also noticeable differences in the formatting dimension.
4.3
RQ3: Coding Style Comparison
In addition to analyzing coding style inconsistency between LLMs and human programmers, we
further compare the code samples generated by LLMs and the ground truths in terms of three
aspects: readability, conciseness, and robustness.
• Readability: The readability and understandability of code.
• Conciseness: The simplicity of the code and the degree to which it is free of unnecessary
elements.
• Robustness: The ability of the code to handle corner cases and potential errors. To illustrate
the relationship between robustness and code style, consider two programmers, A and B.
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE032:14
Wang et al.
Programmer B prefers to implement exception handling mechanisms in the code, while
Programmer A tends to overlook this practice. In the Figure 9, func_A works correctly when
the input is valid, but it will crash if the input is zero. In contrast, func_B includes an exception
handling mechanism, ensuring the program does not crash and providing a meaningful error
message when division by zero occurs. This demonstrates how Programmer B’s code is more
robust due to different coding style.
We compare the code samples generated by LLMs from RQ1 with their corresponding ground truths
and evaluate each of the three aspects. For each analysis, we determine whether the generated code
is better than the ground truth ("model better"), whether they are comparable ("tie"), or whether the
ground truth is better ("human better"). The scoring for the three aspects follows these principles: (i)
Readability: If code sample A conveys the intent and logical structure more clearly than code sample
B, it is superior in readability. (ii) Conciseness: If code sample A achieves the same functionality
as code sample B while eliminating unnecessary redundancies, it is considered superior in terms
of conciseness. This involves reducing the number of intermediate variables, optimizing loops,
etc. (iii) Robustness: If code sample A effectively implements error handling and fault tolerance
mechanisms, whereas code sample B lacks such mechanisms, the former is deemed superior in
robustness. This includes the presence of input validation, exception handling, etc.
The annotation is conducted independently by two annotators. Both annotators have many
years of programming experience and possess a certain level of understanding regarding research
on code style. The two annotators independently score the code samples, resulting in two sets of
annotations. Cohen’s Kappa [13] is a statistical measure used to assess the consistency between two
annotators for a classification task. We calculated the Cohen’s Kappa values for the two annotations
on readability, conciseness, and robustness, which are 0.63, 0.79, and 0.68, respectively. However,
the discrepancies that arose in the annotations were ultimately resolved through discussions to
reach a consensus.
Figure 11 show the proportion of code samples that received different scores (model better, tie
and human better) on the three aspects for each model. Overall, the code samples generated by
the LLMs is comparable to that written by human programmers in the three aspects. On average,
the code generated by the five models is comparable to or even superior to the code written by
programmers in 89.5%, 76.5%, and 94.2% of cases in terms of readability, conciseness, and robustness,
respectively. The following is a comparative analysis of the readability, conciseness, and robustness
of the code samples generated by the five LLMs. From the perspective of readability, the code
samples generated by DeepSeekCoder-6.7B have the highest readability, while those generated by
StarCoder2-7B have the lowest. In terms of conciseness, the conciseness of code samples generated
by CodeLlama-7B, StarCoder2-7B, and DeepSeekCoder-6.7B is comparable, while GPT-4 generates
less concise code. Figure 10 presents an example that the conciseness of a code sample generated
by GPT-4 is inferior to that of ground truth written by human programmers. Note that conciseness
and readability are often trade-offs. As shown in Figure 10, GPT-4 enhances readability by splitting
one statement into two lines. All five studied LLMs demonstrate relatively high robustness. This
suggests that the models might have learned more robust coding styles from their training data,
such as more rigorous input parameter checks, which human programmers might omit due to
oversight or to avoid excessive complexity.
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style Inconsistencies in Large Language Models
FSE032:15
CodeLlama-7B
StarCoder2-7B
DSC-1.3B
DSC-6.7B
GPT-4
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage(%)
36.8
52.3
10.9
38.6
48.2
13.2
19.9
68.2
11.8
4.2
89.0
6.8
36.5
54.0
9.5
Model Better
Tie
Human Better
(a) Readability
CodeLlama-7B
StarCoder2-7B
DSC-1.3B
DSC-6.7B
GPT-4
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage(%)
46.4
35.9
17.7
43.0
40.4
16.7
28.4
42.2
29.4
24.2
59.4
16.5
15.5
47.3
37.3
Model Better
Tie
Human Better
(b) Conciseness
CodeLlama-7B
StarCoder2-7B
DSC-1.3B
DSC-6.7B
GPT-4
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage(%)
11.4
81.4
7.3
3.5
89.5
7.0
18.5
77.3
4.3
13.5
79.7
6.8
9.8
86.5
3.8
Model Better
Tie
Human Better
(c) Robustness
Fig. 11. Score Distribution across Readability, Conciseness, and Robustness.
Prompt-head-concise:  # Complete the function below by following the provided function signature and docstring. 
Ensure the implementation adheres to good coding style practices, including readability, simplicity, and robustness. 
[Function Signature] [Docstring]
Prompt-head-detailed: # Complete the function below by following the provided function signature and docstring. 
Ensure the implementation adheres to good coding style practices, including readability, simplicity, and robustness. 
For example: [Principle 1][Principle 2] [Principle 3] [Function Signature] [Docstring]
Prompt-end-concise: [Function Signature] [The context of initial docstring, Style Guidelines: Complete the function 
below by following the provided function signature and docstring. Ensure the implementation adheres to good 
coding style practices, including readability, simplicity, and robustness.] 
Prompt-end-detailed: [Function Signature] [The context of initial docstring, Style Guidelines: Complete the function 
below by following the provided function signature and docstring. Ensure the implementation adheres to good coding 
style practices, including readability, simplicity, and robustness. For example: [Principle 1][Principle 2] [Principle 3]]
Note: 
• Principle  1: Include meaningful inline comments to enhance code readability
• Principle 2: Use if statements for input validation and try-except blocks for exception handling 
to improve code robustness
• Principle 3: Avoid excessive use of intermediate variables to keep the code simple 
• “head” or “end”: The placement of the style guidelines
• “concise” or “detailed” :The level of detail of the style guidelines 
Fig. 12. Four Enhanced Prompts in RQ4 Study.
RQ3 Summary: Overall, the code samples generated by the five LLMs is comparable to
human-written code in terms of readability, conciseness, and robustness. Among the studied
models, DeepSeekCoder-6.7B produces the most readable code, while code samples generated
by GPT-4 has the lowest simplicity but the highest robustness.
4.4
RQ4: Style Improvement by Prompting Techniques
In this RQ, we investigate whether prompting techniques can improve the coding style of LLMs.
We conduct experiments with DeepSeekCoder-6.7B on 20 sampled Python tasks from CoderEval.
These tasks are randomly selected from those that DeepSeekCoder-6.7B can complete, meaning
DeepSeekCoder-6.7B can generate code samples that pass all corresponding test cases. We design
four types of enhanced prompts for this study (refer to Figure 12), aiming to instruct the model to
generate code with better coding style using explicit style guidelines. The design of these prompts
investigates the impact of the placement and detail level of style guidelines. In prompt names,
“-head” or “-end” specifies whether the style guidelines are placed before the function signature
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE032:16
Wang et al.
Basic
Prompt-1Prompt-2Prompt-3Prompt-4
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage(%)
1.5
90.3
8.2
1.7
93.0
5.2
0.7
90.5
8.8
2.7
90.7
6.7
2.6
94.9
2.6
Model Better
Tie
Human Better
(a) Readability
Basic
Prompt-1Prompt-2Prompt-3Prompt-4
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage(%)
31.3
26.9
41.8
31.3
20.9
47.8
33.6
26.3
40.1
34.7
12.0
53.3
30.8
20.5
48.7
Model Better
Tie
Human Better
(b) Conciseness
Basic
Prompt-1Prompt-2Prompt-3Prompt-4
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage(%)
16.4
73.1
10.4
12.1
85.2
2.6
24.1
75.9
0.0
6.7
85.3
8.0
34.6
61.5
3.8
Model Better
Tie
Human Better
(c) Robustness
Fig. 13. Score Distribution across Readability, Conciseness, and Robustness by Different Prompts. P-1, P-2, P-3,
P-4 Stand for Prompt-head-concise, Prompt-head-detailed, Prompt-end-concise, and Prompt-end-detailed,
Respectively.
and docstring, similar to a directive, or appended at the end of the original docstring, simulating a
normal docstring style. “-concise” and “-detailed” indicate the level of detail in the style guidelines.
The detailed version includes three specific principles related to code readability, conciseness, and
robustness, in addition to the concise information.
Among the selected tasks, DeepSeekCoder-6.7B generates 134 functionally correct code samples
using the basic prompt, i.e., the original function signature and docstring as input. Then, for each
type of enhanced prompt, DeepSeekCoder-6.7B generates 10 code samples for the 20 selected tasks,
resulting in 115, 137, 75, and 78 functionally correct code samples for each of the four enhanced
prompts, respectively. The accuracy for the four enhanced prompts is 57.5%, 68.5%, 37.5%, and 39.0%,
respectively, compared to the 67.0% accuracy of the basic prompt. Except for prompt-head-detailed,
the enhanced prompts result in lower accuracy compared to the basic prompt, suggesting that
using more complex prompts may lead to a decrease in the functional correctness of the generated
code.
The two annotators mentioned in Section 4.3 referred to the scoring principles mentioned in
Section 4.3 to score the code samples generated using the basic prompt and the four enhanced
prompts for readability, conciseness, and robustness. The Cohen’s Kappa for the two sets of
annotations on readability, conciseness, and robustness were 0.65, 0.81, and 0.74, respectively.
Despite the discrepancies in the annotations, the annotators were eventually resolved through
discussions, leading to a consensus. The G-test [59] is a statistical method used to assess the
association between categorical variables. In this study, we applied the G-test to determine whether
the probability distributions of scores for the basic prompt and the four enhanced prompts show
significant differences across the three aspects of readability, conciseness, and robustness. The
results indicated that the p-values for all three aspects were below 0.05, suggesting a statistically
significant difference in the score distributions among the five prompts across these three aspects.
The results are depicted in Figure 13. Among the enhanced prompts, Prompt-head-concise,
Prompt-end-concise, and Prompt-end-detailed slightly improve the readability of the code samples
generated by DeepSeekCoder-6.7B. However, as shown in Figure 13(b), only Prompt-head-detailed
enhances the conciseness of DeepSeekCoder-6.7B’s code samples. This is because there’s often a
trade-off between readability and conciseness, where improving one may compromise the other.
Additionally, as seen in Figure 13(c), all four enhanced prompts contribute to some extent to the
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style Inconsistencies in Large Language Models
FSE032:17
# ground truth
def remove_ending_os_sep(input_list):
    if input_list is None:
        return []
    return [item[:-1] if len(item) >= 2 and
                         item.endswith(os.sep)
            else item for item in input_list]
# code sample
def remove_ending_os_sep(input_list):
    if not input_list:
        return []
    output_list = []
    for i in input_list:
        if len(i) > 1 and i[-1] == os.sep:
            output_list.append(i[:-1])
        else:
            output_list.append(i)
    return output_list
# ground truth
def paging(response, max_results):
    i = 0
    while i < len(response):
        yield response[i:i + max_results]
        i = i + max_results
# code sample
def paging(response, max_results):
    response_count = len(response)
    page_count = response_count // max_results
    page_rest = response_count % max_results
    start_idx = 0
    for idx in range(page_count):
        end_idx = start_idx + max_results
        yield response[start_idx:end_idx]
        start_idx = end_idx
    if page_rest != 0:
        yield response[start_idx:]
(a)
   (b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
# ground truth
def match_file_by_prefix(prefix, file_path):
    basename = os.path.basename(file_path)
    if basename.startswith(prefix + "-"):
        return True
    if basename.startswith(prefix + "."):
        return True
    return False
# code sample
def match_file_by_prefix(prefix, file_path):
    base_name = os.path.basename(file_path)
    if (base_name.startswith(prefix+"-") or
            base_name.startswith(prefix+".")):
        return True
    else:
        return False
List Slicing
List Comprehension
Ground Truth Code
LLM-Generated Code
Poor formatting
Fig. 14. Examples of (i) Poor formatting characteristics; (ii) Unfamiliar with basic Python features; (iii) Rare
use of advanced syntax features. On the left side of the image, (a), (c), and (e) are the ground truth for each
example, while on the right side, (b), (d), and (f) are the code samples generated by LLMs.
improved robustness of DeepSeekCoder-6.7B’s code samples. In conclusion: (i) Incorporating style-
guiding information into prompts may lead to decreased accuracy in generated code, as observed
in our evaluation. (ii) Relying solely on prompt engineering may not fully resolve issues related to
code style. Additional strategies or refinements may be necessary.
RQ4 Summary: Certain types of prompts can slightly improve the readability and robustness
of generated code, but only one type enhances conciseness. There is a trade-off between
readability and conciseness, indicating that while prompt engineering can help, it is not
sufficient to fully address issues related to coding style. Including guidance in prompts may
also decrease the accuracy of generated code.
4.5
Case Studies
In the code samples we observed, we categorized and analyzed cases where the code samples
exhibited inconsistent coding styles compared to the ground truth. We identified the following
common scenarios.
Poor formatting characteristics. LLMs may generate code with poor formatting characteristics,
such as improper use of spaces. Figure 14 (b) is a function generated by GPT-4. In the expression
“base_name.startswith(prefix+"-")”, the “+” operator is not surrounded by spaces, which is not a
good practice in the use of spaces. The code generated by the other four models also contains
improper use of spaces, such as DeepSeekCoder-6.7B generating the code “yield response[start:
end]”. However, the PEP-8 compliant version should be written as “yield response[start:end]”.
Unfamiliar with basic Python features. LLMs might not be very familiar with some basic
syntax features, which results in generating more complex code. For example, in Figure 14 (d),
DeepSeekCoder-6.7B might not understand list slicing operations well, so it generated more complex
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE032:18
Wang et al.
code to avoid out-of-bounds indexing. Assuming the list has a length of 4, using list[3:5] in
Python will not result in an error. Instead, it will return elements from index 3 to the end of the list.
However, in the corresponding ground truth of the code sample (Figure 14 (c)), the code logic is
clear and concise.
Rare use of advanced syntax features. Compared to code written by human programmers,
code generated by LLMs often does not use advanced syntax features of the Python language, such
as Pythonic idioms. As shown in Figure 14 (e), the ground truth uses list comprehension to build a
list, while the code sample in Figure 14 (f), uses a more conventional method to build the list. It
first constructs an empty list and then uses the append() method to add elements to the empty list.
Compared to the ground truth, the simplicity of the code sample is inferior.
5
Threats to Validity
We have identified the following threats to our study.
Data Quality. One potential threat to validity is the quality of the raw data used for our
empirical study. To ensure the quality of the data for open coding, we applied multiple strategies:
comprehensive unit testing to validate the functionality of the generated code samples, manual
filtering to remove any that did not meet our criteria for functional correctness and implementation
conciseness, and selecting tasks from the popular benchmark CoderEval, ensuring their high quality
and relevance.
LLM Utilization. Another potential threat is the utilization (e.g., source, parameter settings)
of the LLMs used in our study. We carefully used the official release versions of each model to
avoid any potential issues with unofficial or modified versions, followed the guidelines provided by
the model developers to ensure proper implementation and usage, and conducted repeated tests
to verify the performance and consistency of the models’ outputs. To ensure a fair comparison,
we used the same prompt structure and generation parameters for each model, standardizing the
experimental setup across different models.
Taxonomy Reliability and Completeness. The reliability and completeness of the inconsis-
tency types identified pose another potential threat. We employed the open coding methodology
to systematically identify and categorize inconsistency types, adhered to established open coding
practices to ensure thoroughness and accuracy, and ensured that our taxonomy was stable by
iteratively refining the inconsistency types until no new categories emerged. We involved multiple
annotators to score these metrics, and they discussed their ratings to reach a consensus, reducing
individual biases and ensuring more objective assessments. To further bolster the credibility of our
findings, we have made all our data publicly available, allowing others to verify our results and
methodology, thus enhancing the robustness of our conclusions.
6
Conclusion
Many studies have focused on improving the functional correctness of LLM-based code generation.
However, the code style of LLMs—an important aspect of code quality that extends beyond func-
tional correctness—remains under-explored. To fill this gap, this paper makes the first attempt to
investigate the coding style differences between LLMs and human developers through an empirical
study. Specifically, we compare the code generation results of five mainstream LLMs with ground
truth on the CoderEval benchmark.
We present a comprehensive taxonomy of coding style inconsistencies between LLMs and human
developers, identifying 24 inconsistency types across five dimensions. We adopt the definition
of code style from previous work, but our taxonomy offers a more detailed classification of code
style. Our analysis reveals clear coding style differences between the studied LLMs and human
developers, particularly in statements/expressions and formatting, while showing similar coding
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style Inconsistencies in Large Language Models
FSE032:19
styles among the studied LLMs. We further discuss potential causes of these style inconsistencies
and explore ways to improve coding style discrepancies through prompt engineering, providing a
foundation for future research in this area.
7
Data Availability
All the data used in this study is provided in the replication package [1].
8
Acknowledgments
The work is supported by CCF-Huawei Populus Grove Fund CCFHuaweiSE202403, the Natural
Science Foundation of Guangdong Province under Grant 2024A1515010255, and National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62402113.
References
[1] 2024. Replication Package. https://github.com/DeepSoftwareAnalytics/Coding-Style-Empirical
[2] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida,
Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774
(2023).
[3] Toufique Ahmed, Kunal Suresh Pai, Premkumar Devanbu, and Earl Barr. 2024. Automatic semantic augmentation of
language model prompts (for code summarization). In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on
Software Engineering. 1–13.
[4] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie
Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. 2021. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732
(2021).
[5] Nikolaos Bafatakis, Niels Boecker, Wenjie Boon, Martin Cabello Salazar, Jens Krinke, Gazi Oznacar, and Robert White.
2019. Python coding style compliance on stack overflow. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 16th International Conference on Mining
Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE, 210–214.
[6] Ramakrishna Bairi, Atharv Sonwane, Aditya Kanade, Arun Iyer, Suresh Parthasarathy, Sriram Rajamani, B Ashok,
Shashank Shet, et al. 2023. Codeplan: Repository-level coding using llms and planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12499
(2023).
[7] R E Berry and B AE Meekings. 1985. A style analysis of C programs. Commun. ACM 28, 1 (1985), 80–88.
[8] Angelica Chen, Jérémy Scheurer, Tomasz Korbak, Jon Ander Campos, Jun Shern Chan, Samuel R Bowman, Kyunghyun
Cho, and Ethan Perez. 2023. Improving code generation by training with natural language feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.16749 (2023).
[9] Binger Chen and Ziawasch Abedjan. 2023. DUETCS: Code Style Transfer through Generation and Retrieval. In 2023
IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2362–2373.
[10] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards,
Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[11] Penglong Chen, Zhen Li, Yu Wen, and Lili Liu. 2022. Generating adversarial source programs using important tokens-
based structural transformations. In 2022 26th International Conference on Engineering of Complex Computer Systems
(ICECCS). IEEE, 173–182.
[12] Anton Cheshkov, Pavel Zadorozhny, and Rodion Levichev. 2023. Evaluation of chatgpt model for vulnerability detection.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07232 (2023).
[13] Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and psychological measurement 20, 1
(1960), 37–46.
[14] Domenico Cotroneo, Cristina Improta, Pietro Liguori, and Roberto Natella. 2023. Vulnerabilities in ai code generators:
Exploring targeted data poisoning attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.04451 (2023).
[15] Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. 2023. Self-collaboration Code Generation via ChatGPT. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.07590 (2023).
[16] Xueying Du, Mingwei Liu, Kaixin Wang, Hanlin Wang, Junwei Liu, Yixuan Chen, Jiayi Feng, Chaofeng Sha, Xin Peng,
and Yiling Lou. 2023. Classeval: A manually-crafted benchmark for evaluating llms on class-level code generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01861 (2023).
[17] Jing Gong, Yanghui Wu, Linxi Liang, Zibin Zheng, and Yanlin Wang. 2024. CoSQA+: Enhancing Code Search Dataset
with Matching Code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11589 (2024).
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE032:20
Wang et al.
[18] Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guanting Chen, Xiao Bi, Y Wu, YK Li, et al.
2024. DeepSeek-Coder: When the Large Language Model Meets Programming–The Rise of Code Intelligence. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.14196 (2024).
[19] Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guanting Chen, Xiao Bi, Y Wu, YK Li, et al.
2024. DeepSeek-Coder: When the Large Language Model Meets Programming–The Rise of Code Intelligence. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.14196 (2024).
[20] Lianghong Guo, Yanlin Wang, Ensheng Shi, Wanjun Zhong, Hongyu Zhang, Jiachi Chen, Ruikai Zhang, Yuchi Ma,
and Zibin Zheng. 2024. When to stop? towards efficient code generation in llms with excess token prevention. In
Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 1073–1085.
[21] Rajarshi Haldar and Julia Hockenmaier. 2024. Analyzing the performance of large language models on code summa-
rization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08018 (2024).
[22] Fan Hu, Yanlin Wang, Lun Du, Hongyu Zhang, Dongmei Zhang, and Xirong Li. 2024. Tackling Long Code Search
with Splitting, Encoding, and Aggregating. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024). 15500–15510.
[23] Baizhou Huang, Shuai Lu, Weizhu Chen, Xiaojun Wan, and Nan Duan. 2023. Enhancing Large Language Models in
Coding Through Multi-Perspective Self-Consistency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17272 (2023).
[24] Tao Huang, Zhihong Sun, Zhi Jin, Ge Li, and Chen Lyu. 2024. KareCoder: A New Knowledge-Enriched Code Generation
System. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion
Proceedings. 270–271.
[25] Naman Jain, Tianjun Zhang, Wei-Lin Chiang, Joseph E Gonzalez, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. 2023. LLM-Assisted
Code Cleaning For Training Accurate Code Generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.14904 (2023).
[26] Hui Jiang, Chulun Zhou, Fandong Meng, Biao Zhang, Jie Zhou, Degen Huang, Qingqiang Wu, and Jinsong Su. 2021.
Exploring dynamic selection of branch expansion orders for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00261 (2021).
[27] Shuyang Jiang, Yuhao Wang, and Yu Wang. 2023. SelfEvolve: A Code Evolution Framework via Large Language
Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02907 (2023).
[28] Xue Jiang, Yihong Dong, Lecheng Wang, Qiwei Shang, and Ge Li. 2023. Self-planning code generation with large
language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06689 (2023).
[29] Shahedul Huq Khandkar. 2009. Open coding. University of Calgary 23, 2009 (2009).
[30] Mizuki Kondo, Daisuke Kawahara, and Toshiyuki Kurabayashi. 2024. Improving Repository-level Code Search with
Text Conversion. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 4: Student Research Workshop). 130–137.
[31] Hung Le, Yue Wang, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Chu Hong Hoi. 2022. Coderl: Mastering
code generation through pretrained models and deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 35 (2022), 21314–21328.
[32] Jia Li, Ge Li, Yongmin Li, and Zhi Jin. 2023. Structured Chain-of-Thought Prompting for Code Generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.06599 (2023).
[33] Jia Li, Ge Li, Chongyang Tao, Huangzhao Zhang, Fang Liu, and Zhi Jin. 2023. Large Language Model-Aware In-Context
Learning for Code Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.09748 (2023).
[34] Jia Li, Ge Li, Xuanming Zhang, Yihong Dong, and Zhi Jin. 2024. EvoCodeBench: An Evolving Code Generation
Benchmark Aligned with Real-World Code Repositories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00599 (2024).
[35] Jia Li, Ge Li, Yunfei Zhao, Yongmin Li, Huanyu Liu, Hao Zhu, Lecheng Wang, Kaibo Liu, Zheng Fang, Lanshen Wang,
et al. 2024. DevEval: A Manually-Annotated Code Generation Benchmark Aligned with Real-World Code Repositories.
arXiv e-prints (2024), arXiv–2405.
[36] Jia Li, Yongmin Li, Ge Li, Zhi Jin, Yiyang Hao, and Xing Hu. 2023. Skcoder: A sketch-based approach for automatic
code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06144 (2023).
[37] Jiliang Li, Yifan Zhang, Zachary Karas, Collin McMillan, Kevin Leach, and Yu Huang. 2024. Do Machines and Humans
Focus on Similar Code? Exploring Explainability of Large Language Models in Code Summarization. In Proceedings of
the 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Program Comprehension. 47–51.
[38] Jia Li, Yunfei Zhao, Yongmin Li, Ge Li, and Zhi Jin. 2023. Towards Enhancing In-Context Learning for Code Generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17780 (2023).
[39] Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Marc Marone,
Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. 2023. Starcoder: may the source be with you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161
(2023).
[40] Xin-Ye Li, Jiang-Tian Xue, Zheng Xie, and Ming Li. 2023. Think Outside the Code: Brainstorming Boosts Large
Language Models in Code Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10679 (2023).
[41] Yifan Li, Ensheng Shi, Dewu Zheng, Kefeng Duan, Jiachi Chen, and Yanlin Wang. 2024. RepoMinCoder: Improving
Repository-Level Code Generation Based on Information Loss Screening. In Proceedings of the 15th Asia-Pacific
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style Inconsistencies in Large Language Models
FSE032:21
Symposium on Internetware. 229–238.
[42] Zehan Li, Jianfei Zhang, Chuantao Yin, Yuanxin Ouyang, and Wenge Rong. 2024. ProCQA: A Large-scale Community-
based Programming Question Answering Dataset for Code Search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16702 (2024).
[43] Junwei Liu, Yixuan Chen, Mingwei Liu, Xin Peng, and Yiling Lou. 2024. STALL+: Boosting LLM-based Repository-level
Code Completion with Static Analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10018 (2024).
[44] Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Is Your Code Generated by ChatGPT Really
Correct? Rigorous Evaluation of Large Language Models for Code Generation. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans,
LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023, Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and
Sergey Levine (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/43e9d647ccd3e4b7b5baab53f0368686-Abstract-
Conference.html
[45] Mingwei Liu, Tianyong Yang, Yiling Lou, Xueying Du, Ying Wang, and Xin Peng. 2023. CodeGen4Libs: A Two-Stage
Approach for Library-Oriented Code Generation. In 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering, ASE 2023, Luxembourg, September 11-15, 2023. IEEE, 434–445. https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE56229.2023.00159
[46] Cristina V Lopes, Vanessa I Klotzman, Iris Ma, and Iftekar Ahmed. 2024. Commit Messages in the Age of Large
Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17622 (2024).
[47] Abhinav Reddy Mandli, Saurabhsingh Rajput, and Tushar Sharma. 2024. COMET: Generating Commit Messages using
Delta Graph Context Representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01841 (2024).
[48] Vadim Markovtsev, Waren Long, Hugo Mougard, Konstantin Slavnov, and Egor Bulychev. 2019. STYLE-ANALYZER:
fixing code style inconsistencies with interpretable unsupervised algorithms. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 16th International
Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE, 468–478.
[49] Qing Mi, Jacky Keung, and Yang Yu. 2016. Measuring the stylistic inconsistency in software projects using hierarchical
agglomerative clustering. In Proceedings of the The 12th International Conference on Predictive Models and Data Analytics
in Software Engineering. 1–10.
[50] Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, Chenxue Wang, Shichao Liu, and Qing Wang. 2023.
ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with Intention Clarification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10996
(2023).
[51] Ansong Ni, Srini Iyer, Dragomir Radev, Veselin Stoyanov, Wen-tau Yih, Sida Wang, and Xi Victoria Lin. 2023. Lever:
Learning to verify language-to-code generation with execution. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 26106–26128.
[52] Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. 2022.
Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13474
(2022).
[53] Sanghak Oh, Kiho Lee, Seonhye Park, Doowon Kim, and Hyoungshick Kim. 2023. Poisoned ChatGPT Finds Work
for Idle Hands: Exploring Developers’ Coding Practices with Insecure Suggestions from Poisoned AI Models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.06227 (2023).
[54] Theo X Olausson, Jeevana Priya Inala, Chenglong Wang, Jianfeng Gao, and Armando Solar-Lezama. 2023. Demystifying
GPT Self-Repair for Code Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09896 (2023).
[55] Paul W Oman and Curtis R Cook. 1990. A taxonomy for programming style. In Proceedings of the 1990 ACM annual
conference on Cooperation. 244–250.
[56] OpenAI. 2021. OpenAI Code. https://openai.com/blog/openai-code.
[57] Terence Parr and Jurgen Vinju. 2016. Towards a universal code formatter through machine learning. In Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Software Language Engineering. 137–151.
[58] Huy N Phan, Hoang N Phan, Tien N Nguyen, and Nghi DQ Bui. 2024. RepoHyper: Better Context Retrieval Is All You
Need for Repository-Level Code Completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06095 (2024).
[59] F Rohlf et al. 1981. Biometry the principles and practice of statistics in biological research. (1981).
[60] Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal
Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. 2023. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950
(2023).
[61] Max Schäfer, Sarah Nadi, Aryaz Eghbali, and Frank Tip. 2023. An empirical evaluation of using large language models
for automated unit test generation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2023).
[62] Ensheng Shi, Yanlin Wang, Hongyu Zhang, Lun Du, Shi Han, Dongmei Zhang, and Hongbin Sun. 2023. Towards
Efficient Fine-tuning of Pre-trained Code Models: An Experimental Study and Beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05216
(2023).
[63] Mohammed Latif Siddiq, Joanna Santos, Ridwanul Hasan Tanvir, Noshin Ulfat, FA Rifat, and V Carvalho Lopes. 2023.
Exploring the effectiveness of large language models in generating unit tests. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00418 (2023).
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE032:22
Wang et al.
[64] KR Srinath. 2017. Python–the fastest growing programming language. International Research Journal of Engineering
and Technology 4, 12 (2017), 354–357.
[65] Chia-Yi Su and Collin McMillan. 2024. Distilled GPT for source code summarization. Automated Software Engineering
31, 1 (2024), 22.
[66] Weisong Sun, Chunrong Fang, Yudu You, Yun Miao, Yi Liu, Yuekang Li, Gelei Deng, Shenghan Huang, Yuchen Chen,
Quanjun Zhang, et al. 2023. Automatic code summarization via chatgpt: How far are we? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12865
(2023).
[67] Zhensu Sun, Xiaoning Du, Fu Song, Shangwen Wang, Mingze Ni, and Li Li. 2023. Don’t Complete It! Preventing
Unhelpful Code Completion for Productive and Sustainable Neural Code Completion Systems. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th
International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings (ICSE-Companion). IEEE, 324–325.
[68] Karl Tamberg and Hayretdin Bahsi. 2024. Harnessing Large Language Models for Software Vulnerability Detection: A
Comprehensive Benchmarking Study. arXiv:2405.15614 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15614
[69] Wei Tao, Yucheng Zhou, Yanlin Wang, Hongyu Zhang, Haofen Wang, and Wenqiang Zhang. 2024. KADEL: Knowledge-
Aware Denoising Learning for Commit Message Generation. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology
(2024).
[70] Sindhu Tipirneni, Ming Zhu, and Chandan K Reddy. 2024. Structcoder: Structure-aware transformer for code generation.
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data 18, 3 (2024), 1–20.
[71] Shubham Ugare, Tarun Suresh, Hangoo Kang, Sasa Misailovic, and Gagandeep Singh. 2024. Improving llm code
generation with grammar augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01632 (2024).
[72] Yanlin Wang, Lianghong Guo, Ensheng Shi, Wenqing Chen, Jiachi Chen, Wanjun Zhong, Menghan Wang, Hui Li,
Hongyu Zhang, Ziyu Lyu, et al. 2023. You Augment Me: Exploring ChatGPT-based Data Augmentation for Semantic
Code Search. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 14–25.
[73] Yanlin Wang, Yanxian Huang, Daya Guo, Hongyu Zhang, and Zibin Zheng. 2024. SparseCoder: Identifier-Aware Sparse
Transformer for File-Level Code Summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14727 (2024).
[74] Yanlin Wang, Yanli Wang, Daya Guo, Jiachi Chen, Ruikai Zhang, Yuchi Ma, and Zibin Zheng. 2024. Rlcoder: Reinforce-
ment learning for repository-level code completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.19487 (2024).
[75] Ziliang Wang, Ge Li, Jia Li, Yingfei Xiong, and Zhi Jin. 2024. M2CVD: Multi-Model Collaboration for Code Vulnerability
Detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05940 (2024).
[76] Zejun Wang, Jia Li, Ge Li, and Zhi Jin. 2023. ChatCoder: Chat-based Refine Requirement Improves LLMs’ Code
Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00272 (2023).
[77] Zhuokui Xie, Yinghao Chen, Chen Zhi, Shuiguang Deng, and Jianwei Yin. 2023. ChatUniTest: a ChatGPT-based
automated unit test generation tool. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04764 (2023).
[78] Prateek Yadav, Qing Sun, Hantian Ding, Xiaopeng Li, Dejiao Zhang, Ming Tan, Xiaofei Ma, Parminder Bhatia, Ramesh
Nallapati, Murali Krishna Ramanathan, et al. 2023. Exploring continual learning for code generation models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.02435 (2023).
[79] Aidan Z. H. Yang, Haoye Tian, He Ye, Ruben Martins, and Claire Le Goues. 2024. Security Vulnerability Detection
with Multitask Self-Instructed Fine-Tuning of Large Language Models. arXiv:2406.05892 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/
2406.05892
[80] Rafed Muhammad Yasir and Dr Ahmedul Kabir. 2022. Exploring the Impact of Code Style in Identifying Good
Programmers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10891 (2022).
[81] Hao Yu, Bo Shen, Dezhi Ran, Jiaxin Zhang, Qi Zhang, Yuchi Ma, Guangtai Liang, Ying Li, Qianxiang Wang, and Tao
Xie. 2024. Codereval: A benchmark of pragmatic code generation with generative pre-trained models. In Proceedings
of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering. 1–12.
[82] Zhiqiang Yuan, Junwei Liu, Qiancheng Zi, Mingwei Liu, Xin Peng, and Yiling Lou. 2023. Evaluating instruction-tuned
large language models on code comprehension and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01240 (2023).
[83] Zhiqiang Yuan, Yiling Lou, Mingwei Liu, Shiji Ding, Kaixin Wang, Yixuan Chen, and Xin Peng. 2023. No more manual
tests? evaluating and improving chatgpt for unit test generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04207 (2023).
[84] Imam Nur Bani Yusuf and Lingxiao Jiang. 2024. Your Instructions Are Not Always Helpful: Assessing the Efficacy of
Instruction Fine-tuning for Software Vulnerability Detection. arXiv:2401.07466 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.07466
[85] Daoguang Zan, Bei Chen, Yongshun Gong, Junzhi Cao, Fengji Zhang, Bingchao Wu, Bei Guan, Yilong Yin, and Yongji
Wang. 2023. Private-library-oriented code generation with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15370
(2023).
[86] Daoguang Zan, Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Dianjie Lu, Bingchao Wu, Bei Guan, Wang Yongji, and Jian-Guang Lou. 2023.
Large language models meet NL2Code: A survey. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 7443–7464.
[87] Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jacky Keung, Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao, Jian-Guang Lou, and
Weizhu Chen. 2023. RepoCoder: Repository-Level Code Completion Through Iterative Retrieval and Generation.
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
Beyond Functional Correctness: Investigating Coding Style Inconsistencies in Large Language Models
FSE032:23
arXiv:2303.12570 [cs.CL]
[88] Huangzhao Zhang, Zhiyi Fu, Ge Li, Lei Ma, Zhehao Zhao, Hua’an Yang, Yizhe Sun, Yang Liu, and Zhi Jin. 2022.
Towards robustness of deep program processing models—detection, estimation, and enhancement. ACM Transactions
on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 31, 3 (2022), 1–40.
[89] Kechi Zhang, Zhuo Li, Jia Li, Ge Li, and Zhi Jin. 2023. Self-Edit: Fault-Aware Code Editor for Code Generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.04087 (2023).
[90] Shun Zhang, Zhenfang Chen, Yikang Shen, Mingyu Ding, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan. 2023. Planning with
Large Language Models for Code Generation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations.
[91] Yuxia Zhang, Zhiqing Qiu, Klaas-Jan Stol, Wenhui Zhu, Jiaxin Zhu, Yingchen Tian, and Hui Liu. 2024. Automatic
commit message generation: A critical review and directions for future work. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
(2024).
[92] Zibin Zheng, Kaiwen Ning, Jiachi Chen, Yanlin Wang, Wenqing Chen, Lianghong Guo, and Weicheng Wang. 2023.
Towards an understanding of large language models in software engineering tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11396
(2023).
[93] Zibin Zheng, Kaiwen Ning, Yanlin Wang, Jingwen Zhang, Dewu Zheng, Mingxi Ye, and Jiachi Chen. 2023. A survey of
large language models for code: Evolution, benchmarking, and future trends. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10372 (2023).
[94] Zibin Zheng, Kaiwen Ning, Yanlin Wang, Jingwen Zhang, Dewu Zheng, Mingxi Ye, and Jiachi Chen. 2023. A Survey
of Large Language Models for Code: Evolution, Benchmarking, and Future Trends. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10372
(2023).
[95] Yuqi Zhu, Jia Li, Ge Li, YunFei Zhao, Zhi Jin, and Hong Mei. 2024. Hot or Cold? Adaptive Temperature Sampling for
Code Generation with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 38.
437–445.
Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE032. Publication date: July 2025.
