A Systematic Literature Review of Code Hallucinations in
LLMs: Characterization, Mitigation Methods, Challenges, and
Future Directions for Reliable AI
CUIYUN GAO, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
GUODONG FAN∗, Shandong Agriculture and Engineering University, China
CHUN YONG CHONG, Monash University Malaysia, Malaysia
SHIZHAN CHEN, Tianjin University, China
CHAO LIU, Chongqing University, China
DAVID LO, Singapore Management University, Singapore
ZIBIN ZHENG, Sun Yat-sen University, China
QING LIAO, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
Model hallucination is one of the most critical challenges faced by Large Language Models (LLMs), especially in
high-stakes code intelligence tasks. As LLMs become increasingly integrated into software engineering tasks,
understanding and mitigating hallucination in code becomes essential. In this survey, we provide a systematic
review of hallucination phenomena in code-oriented LLMs from four key perspectives. First, we begin by
surveying 60 papers to define hallucination in the context of code and summarize its primary causes, such as
data noise, exposure bias, and insufficient semantic grounding, while also tracing recent trends in literature
across natural language processing (NLP) and software engineering communities. Second, we review model
hallucination surveys in a broader span and summarize representative hallucination mitigation strategies, such
as knowledge-enhanced generation, constrained decoding, and post-editing. Third, we review approaches
targeted for code intelligence and highlight code-specific challenges that aggravate hallucination, including
syntax sensitivity, strict type systems, and dependence on external libraries. Meanwhile, we analyze how
emerging code intelligence tasks, e.g., program analysis, symbolic execution, and unit testing, are utilized
to detect and mitigate hallucinations. Fourth, we summarize current evaluation benchmarks, ranging from
static metrics to dynamic checks, e.g., compilation and execution correctness, and emphasize the need for
hallucination-oriented benchmarks. Finally, we highlight several key challenges and future directions. We
explore the subtle balance between hallucination and generalization, and distinguish hallucinations from
ordinary functional errors. As hallucinations often reveal LLMs’ issues, we point out the challenges posed
by private codebases, where the lack of public data makes hallucinations harder to detect and correct. This
paper lays the foundations and outlines the pathways toward reliable AI by focusing on the understanding,
evaluation, and mitigation of hallucinations in code LLMs.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering; • Computing methodologies →Artificial intelligence;
∗Corresponding author.
Authors’ Contact Information: Cuiyun Gao, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, gaocuiyun@hit.edu.cn;
Guodong Fan, Shandong Agriculture and Engineering University, Zibo, China, guodong.fan@126.com; Chun Yong Chong,
Monash University Malaysia, Bandar Sunway, Malaysia, chunyong@ieee.org; Shizhan Chen, shizhan@tju.edu.cn, Tianjin
University, Tianjin, China; Chao Liu, liu.chao@cqu.edu.cn, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China; David Lo, davidlo@
smu.edu.sg, Singapore Management University, Singapore, Singapore; Zibin Zheng, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
China, zhzibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn; Qing Liao, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, liaoqing@hit.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 ACM.
ACM 1557-7392/2025/10-ART1
https://doi.org/
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: October 2025.
arXiv:2511.00776v1  [cs.SE]  2 Nov 2025
1:2
Gao et al.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: large language models, code hallucination, reliable AI
ACM Reference Format:
Cuiyun Gao, Guodong Fan, Chun Yong Chong, Shizhan Chen, Chao Liu, David Lo, Zibin Zheng, and Qing
Liao. 2025. A Systematic Literature Review of Code Hallucinations in LLMs: Characterization, Mitigation
Methods, Challenges, and Future Directions for Reliable AI. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 1, 1, Article 1
(October 2025), 43 pages.
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive capabilities in code-related tasks, such as
code summarization [22], generation [54], and completion [49]. However, LLMs are also prone
to producing outputs that are syntactically correct and plausible, yet factually incorrect, non-
executable, or inconsistent with the input intent, referred to as hallucinations. The concept of
hallucinations is originally derived from psychology and widely adopted in artificial intelligence to
describe the phenomenon where models produce outputs that lack grounding in input or reality [86].
While hallucinations are often seen as errors to be eliminated, some studies argue that they are
an inherent byproduct of generative inference mechanisms [114, 139]. The hallucinations pose
significant challenges to the adoption, safety, and reliability of AI systems across various domains.
Understanding the hallucinations remains a major challenge due to issues such as ambiguity in
the field of Natural Language (NL), including programming language (PL). With the rapid develop-
ment of LLMs, the generated text by LLMs reaches or even surpasses human-level performance
on many tasks, e.g., annotation [131] and judgment [129]. However, hallucinations remain a per-
sistent and serious challenge. For example, models may fabricate citations or invent non-existent
objects, significantly undermining user trust in AI systems. Code-intelligence tasks face the same
risk [78, 154], but with domain-specific stakes. Code is governed by strict syntactic and semantic
constraints, depends on modular components, proceeds through multi-stage build/test pipelines,
and must execute. These properties reflect a core distinction: natural language targets human
interpretation, whereas PLs must be unambiguously parsed and executed by machines while re-
maining comprehensible to humans [3, 12]. Although PLs have stronger grammatical constraints
and are largely characterized by context-free grammars modeled by pushdown automata (PDAs),
PLs exhibit stronger domain specificity [105]. As a result, hallucinations in this context can lead to
more severe consequences, such as compilation errors and security vulnerabilities. As shown in
Fig. 1, from the perspective of the workflow, code intelligence approaches often involve four main
stages: retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [31], model fine-tuning [8], various chain-of-thought
reasoning [146], and iterative refinement [27].
While many literature reviews exist in the field of NL [46, 55, 124], there are few literature reviews
on hallucination considering code intelligence tasks. Lee et al. [67] review hallucination by code
generation LLMs, categorize types of hallucinations in the code generated by CodeLLMs, review
existing benchmarks and mitigation strategies, and identify open challenges. Different from Lee’s
work, our study offers four advantages. First, we not only examine hallucinations in code generation
but also extend our analysis to a wider range of code intelligence tasks, including code summariza-
tion, completion, and reasoning. Second, we adopt a cross-disciplinary lens integrating both NLP
and software engineering viewpoints. Third, we conduct fine-grained analyses of hallucination
causes and manifestations, expanding the discussion to architectural and semantic levels, such as
modularity and design pattern violations. Last but not least, our study emphasizes the interplay
between mitigation methods and hallucination, offering a more comprehensive understanding of
this phenomenon across various tasks. Overall, we investigate the unique characteristics of PLs
and conduct a systematic review of research related to hallucinations. Then, we analyze literature
trends, clarify the definition and underlying causes of hallucinations, and summarize representative
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: October 2025.
A Systematic Literature Review of Code Hallucinations in LLMs: Characterization, Mitigation Methods, Challenges, and
Future Directions for Reliable AI
1:3
LLMs






def get_handler(p_ver):
  from ._bolt3 
  import SyncBolt3
  SyncBolt3.handler() ...
Error
Ok
Iteration
Input
…
Output
CoT
Input
Code 
Repository
Final Output
FT
Output
Feedback
Training 
Data


Reliable?
Fig. 1. A General Workflow of Code Intelligence. Step 1: User input; Step 2: retrieval-augmented generation
incorporates external code and documentation to enrich knowledge; Step 3: model fine-tuning adapts pre-
trained models to code-specific tasks and domains; Step 4: chain-of-thought reasoning enhances multi-step
reasoning with structured techniques such as tree-of-thought; Step 5: iterative refinement corrects errors
and repairs code; Step 6: verification results, corrections, and route back to earlier fine-tuning stages; Step 7:
routed back to earlier CoT stages. and Step 8: the system delivers the final output.
approaches in both NLP and code intelligence domains. Special attention is given to the unique
challenges introduced by the structural and executable nature of code. Finally, we discuss open
challenges and future opportunities toward building more reliable code intelligence systems.
To perform a systematic review of this domain, we identified 60 relevant studies from three
widely used electronic databases, including ACM Digital Library, IEEEXplore, and Web of Science.
These databases are selected due to their broad coverage of high-quality publications in the fields
of computer science and software engineering. The search processes involve formulating precise
search strings based on key terms related to the hallucinations of LLMs, following the prior
studies [76, 145]. We apply a set of inclusion and exclusion criteria to ensure the relevance and
quality of the selected studies, with details provided in Section 3. The final set of studies serves as
the foundation for analyzing the current landscape, identifying trends, and uncovering research
gaps in this area. We aim at investigating the following research questions (RQs) in this study:
• RQ1: What are the definitions, causes, and literature trends of hallucinations spe-
cially in code intelligence? Hallucinations in code refer to outputs that are syntactically
correct but semantically incorrect, non-executable, or inconsistent with the input intent.
They often stem from insufficient supervision, domain mismatch, or over-generalization.
Recent studies attempt to define taxonomy, explore causal mechanisms, and analyze the
increasing focus on this phenomenon in code-related tasks.
• RQ2: How are hallucination mitigation methods in NLP developed and categorized?
Various mitigation techniques, such as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), instruction
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: October 2025.
1:4
Gao et al.
tuning, and self-consistency decoding, are adapted from NLP to reduce hallucinations. These
approaches improve grounding and alignment with intent. However, adapting them to the
code domain requires addressing domain-specific issues, e.g., structural and execution nature.
• RQ3: How are hallucination mitigation techniques adapted to address code-specific
challenges? Code-specific approaches include syntax-aware decoding, static analysis, execution-
based feedback, and test-case validation. Techniques such as constraint-guided generation,
compiler-based verification, and structured prompting are used to enforce correctness and
reduce unsafe outputs. These methods are often tailored to account for the executable nature
of code and strict syntactic semantics.
• RQ4: What benchmarks and metrics are used to evaluate hallucinations in code intel-
ligence tasks? Several benchmarks, including CodeHaluEval [123] and HALLUCODE [77],
provide labeled data for evaluating hallucinations in code generation. Evaluation metrics
range from exact match and functional correctness, e.g., pass@k, to hallucination-specific
metrics, e.g., API precision and inconsistency rate. Nevertheless, there is a need for unified
evaluation protocols and comprehensive multi-domain benchmarks.
Based on the findings discussed in all reviewed studies, we observe many challenges in the
existing AI systems for code intelligence. These challenges provide opportunities for further research
studies, for example:
• The difference between hallucination and mistake. Distinguishing hallucinations
from ordinary errors remains difficult, as both may manifest as incorrect outputs, but only
hallucinations involve confident yet unfounded generation.
• Confidence vs. Hallucination in LLMs. High model confidence does not always indicate
factual correctness, and overconfidence can increase the likelihood of hallucinations going
undetected.
• The relationship between hallucinations and generalization ability. While some
degree of generalization is necessary for flexible reasoning, it also increases the risk of
hallucination when the model extrapolates beyond its training data.
• The challenge of private data. Hallucinations are more likely to occur in scenarios
involving private codebases or proprietary APIs, where the model lacks sufficient exposure
or training data, leading to unsupported or fabricated outputs.
The main contributions of this study are as follows:
• We present a cross-domain systematic review of hallucination research spanning NLP and
code intelligence, unifying terminology and analyzing representative failure modes.
• We summarize representative methods for hallucination detection and mitigation in both
NLP and code domains, highlighting their strengths and limitations.
• We identify and analyze the unique challenges of hallucinations in code-related tasks, em-
phasizing the structural and executable nature of PLs.
• We highlight challenges and opportunities for research studies, including the distinction
between hallucinations and genuine errors, the influence of model confidence, and the tension
between generalization and factual accuracy.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides background on hal-
lucinations in the context of code generation. Section 3 details the methodology employed in
our systematic literature review. Section 4 addresses RQ1 by defining code-related hallucinations,
ana