GENERATION CONSTRAINT SCALING CAN MITIGATE
HALLUCINATION
Georgios Kollias, Payel Das, Subhajit Chaudhury
IBM Research
T. J. Watson Research Center
{gkollias, daspa}@us.ibm.com, subhajit@ibm.com
ABSTRACT
Addressing the issue of hallucinations in large language models (LLMs) is a critical challenge. As the
cognitive mechanisms of hallucination have been related to memory, here we explore hallucination
for LLM that is enabled with explicit memory mechanisms. We empirically demonstrate that by
simply scaling the readout vector that constrains generation in a memory-augmented LLM decoder,
hallucination mitigation can be achieved in a training-free manner. Our method is geometry-inspired
and outperforms a state-of-the-art LLM editing method on the task of generation of Wikipedia-like
biography entries both in terms of generation quality and runtime complexity.
Introduction and Background
While large language models exhibit remarkable performance in language generation and machine translation, their
generations suffer from the issue of hallucinations. Model editing techniques provide a path to mitigate such issues,
which involve modifying model parameters such that model outputs are changed to desired responses for specific
questions without compromising the accuracy for others. Context-grounding has been proposed as another means,
where desired response (the actual fact) is included in the context within the prompt, with the expectation that the
decoder will utilize the information included in the prompt. Given the relation between memory and hallucination
in psychology Berberette et al. (2024), it is believed that LLMs with explicit memory mechanism will help lowering
hallucination. Here, we investigate if that is indeed the case, by employing Larimar Das et al. (2024), a recently proposed
LLM decoder that is augmented with an external memory with read/write access. In the memory-augmented LLM,
the encodings of arguments to their memory primitives serve only as intermediate representations in their generation
pipeline to condition the decoding: and then they are silently discarded, they are not further explored. Departing from
this practice, we inspect the geometry of these representations and leverage our findings to devise a simple yet effective
approach for mitigating hallucination. Here we use Larimar as the memory-augmented language model and compare its
performance on a hallucination benchmark with GRACE Hartvigsen et al. (2022) as a baseline, which is an existing
model editing technique.
Larimar
Larimar is a class of LLMs augmented with an external episodic memory controller. In its base instantiation, Larimar
architecture includes (i) an encoder, (ii) an associative memory module and (iii) a decoder. The encoder computes
latent representations of sets of textual inputs (episodes) and queries. These can be respectively used for updating the
memory and querying it to return readout encodings. The decoder generates output text from a prompt, constrained by
the readout.
Note that a readout vector serves as a special compressed key-value (KV) cache at the decoder, which expands to
key-value vector pairs for each of its layers via a weight matrix learnt during Larimar training. It can also be interpreted
as the latent vector that is injected for adapting the decoder to arbitrary conditional input without retraining the model
again as in Optimus Li et al. (2020).
arXiv:2407.16908v1  [cs.CL]  23 Jul 2024
Generation Constraint Scaling Can Mitigate Hallucination
GRACE
GRACE is a method for LLM editing without altering its weights. It works by installing a special adapter at one or
more of its layers: a GRACE adapter is basically a dynamically expanding key-value codebook. A key is the layer’s
input activation; its value is the input to the next layer that, if substituted, would render the correct output for the current
input-output sample pair. Codebook values are learnt by minimizing a task-specific loss function.
Experiments
Data and Models
WikiBio is a hallucination benchmark dataset of Wikipedia-like biographies for 238 subjects generated by prompting
GPT-3 Manakul et al. (2023). It includes annotations for the factuality accuracy for each of the generated sentences by
comparing them to the actual Wikipedia biography article sentences (accurate, major/minor inaccurate) 1.
In Hartvigsen et al. (2022), authors finetune GPT2-XL on WikiBio dataset mixed with sentences from OpenWebText
Aaron Gokaslan and Tellex (2019), a public version of GPT2’s training data and use the resulting model 2 in hallucination
mitigation experiments. We apply edits on the same model and adapter configuration for GRACE benchmarks.
For Larimar-based experiments, we employ Larimar-1.3B model. This comprises a BERT large encoder Devlin et al.
(2018) combined with a GPT2-large Radford et al. (2019) decoder and a memory matrix (512x768), trained over 7.6
million examples constructed by splitting WikiText Merity et al. (2016) texts to small chunks of 64 tokens.
WikiBio hallucination task
We organize the sequence of ni sentences in the actual and GPT-3 generated (hallucinating) texts for the ith WikiBio
entry, i ∈[238], in two lists: [WBi(j)] and [WBhal
i
(j)], j ∈[ni]. Then for each WikiBio entry i we form ni −1
sentence pairs of the form (WBhal
i
(j), WBi(j + 1))), j ∈[ni −1]. The first sentence in the pair (also referred to as
prompt in the sequel) is a GPT-3 generated sentence (with index j) in the entry and the second sentence (alternate name:
input) is the “next” one (index: j + 1), however the latter in the sequence of the sentences in the actual Wikipedia
entry.
We can then use these pairs to generate output sentences from a model. In particular, we:
1. Inform the model of a pair (prompt, input). In Larimar this can be achieved by writing this pair to its
memory. For GRACE this will be an edit operation typically updating the codebook in one of its adapters.
2. Ask the informed model to generate an output sentence based on the prompt only; input is no longer
accessible. In Larimar this will be implemented by (i) querying the memory with the prompt to get a readout
vector and (ii) generating model output initialized to prompt and constrained by readout. For the edited
GRACE model this translates to generating output starting from prompt.
3. Concatenate the sequence of output sentences - here initialized with the first prompt sentence - resulting in
a newly-built and model-specific WikiBio entry.
Figure 1 illustrates this pipeline for Larimar.
An actual Wikipedia entry serves as our non-hallucinating baseline. We quantify hallucination in WikiBio entries
synthesized by Larimar and GRACE using this baseline as our reference text. Two metrics are employed: RougeL score
and Jaccard similarity index between reference and synthesized texts. For Jaccard, set operations are computed on
tokenized texts: tokenizers respectively from Larimar encoder and GRACE model are used.
Base case: initial explorations. By averaging over i = [238] we obtain:
• RougeL scores: 0.39 ± 0.14 for Larimar and 0.49 ± 0.18 for GRACE.
• Jaccard similarity scores: 0.33 ± 0.13 for Larimar and 0.44 ± 0.17 for GRACE.
Ideal case: zwrite = zreadout. Note that ideally, if latent vector representations for readout and write coincide
(zwrite = zreadout), the decoder will have the luxury to attend to a (compressed) representation of what was originally
written in memory, (the (prompt, input) pair). So then, intuitively, when prompted with prompt, the decoder will be
effectively constrained towards generating a textual output that will be similar to input, the second element of the
1https://huggingface.co/datasets/potsawee/wiki_bio_gpt3_hallucination
2https://huggingface.co/tomh/gpt2xl-grace
2
Generation Constraint Scaling Can Mitigate Hallucination
[CLS] + prompt + input + [SEP] 
= write
[CLS] + prompt + [SEP] 
= query 
readout 
prompt 
generate
= prefix + output  
model.memory.write()
model.memory.read()
model.generate()
model.memory 
model 
Figure 1: Larimar pipeline for processing (prompt, input) pairs. Here model refers explicitly to Larimar decoder.
Larimar encoder is implicitly involved in converting tokens in write and the query prompt (prompt bracketed by
[CLS], [SEP] tokens) into latent vectors.
pair. But input is the non-hallucinating reference, consequently our metrics will be elevated. This is indeed the case:
we get 0.79 ± 0.13 for RougeL and 0.72 ± 0.15 for Jaccard similarity, that exceed by far GRACE performance.
Partial input case. Let’s assume that during query we have access to a fraction f of input tokens to augment its
prompt. As expected hallucination reduces for increasing f. For example, Jaccard similarity on average successively
improves from 0.33 (base case; f = 0) to 0.43 (f = 0.25), to 0.60 (f = 0.50), to 0.69 (f = 0.75), which well exceeed
GRACE metrics (0.44) for f = 0.50, 0.75.
It follows that in Larimar, its memory-computed zreadout vectors provide an additional, unique opportunity for
minimizing hallucination in generated output, simply by geometrically aligning them to write encodings. This is
not available to SOTA methods for the same task like GRACE, which encapsulate standard, non-memory-augmented
models by-design. In what follows we investigate this opportunity.
Observations
Figures 2, 3, 4, are panels of histograms capturing geometric properties (distance, angle in degrees, l2-norm) of latent
vector representations for pairs of texts in various stages of our Larimar pipeline as in Figure 1: x-axis depicts the
average of the property for each of the 238 biographies, suitaby binned, and y-axis is the count for the bin.
• We observe that Larimar decoder arbitrarily distorts both the direction and the magnitude of incoming zreadout
vectors: zgenerate vectors tend to increase in magnitude and deviate over a broad range of acute angles from
their decoder inputs. This makes it hard to connect the two vector types (Figure 2). Similarly, when we enforce
a random prompt in querying the memory - which is a way of muting the constrained generation advantage in
Larimar - then zwrite and corresponding zreadout vectors significantly deviate from each other (Figure 3), so
we cannot connect them: lengths contract by an approximate factor of ×10 and their angles distribute wildly
over the full 0◦-180◦range.
• There is a clear alignment between zwrite and zreadout vectors when standard constrained generation is in
effect in Larimar; equivalently when we query its memory with the actual prompt (Figure 4). Although there
is still a relative decrease in vector length by a factor of ×3 to ×4, the two vectors are very well aligned (their
angles are tiny fractions of 1◦).
This last observation provides a very interesting avenue for constraining generation in Larimar so that hallucination is
mitigated: we can scale up the length of zreadout vector by the reported factor (a fixed number s in the range 3 to 4
for all samples). Then its distance to zwrite can be kept approximately to a minimum and subsequently expect to get
hallucination-optimized generations (similar to the ideal case above).
Table 1 summarizes mean RougeL scores for the generated output for different scaling factors s. We get a maximum
value 0.72 (for s = 4) which is significantly better than 0.49 in GRACE (46.9% improvement, simply scaling by a
single factor all samples). 0.72 is smaller than RougeL score for the ideal case in Larimar (0.79) but this is totally
expected since in the ideal case, each sample - implicitly - adapts its scaling factor. We obtain analogous benefits from
scaling reflected in Jaccard scores (Figure 5). Both metrics are maximized for s values in the vicinity of 3 and 4, exactly
as in our observation for the relative contraction of the length of zreadout.
Note that enforcing alignment (by scaling) of two vectors, that serve respectively as input and output of a single Larimar
model module (its memory alone), also optimizes the geometric alignment between two additional vectors, those
encoding input and output, with the distingusihing properties: (i) they sit at the two ends of the full Larimar model
pipeline, (ii) they are not explicitly materialized (for example the encoding for write - rather than for its enclosed
3
Generation Constraint Scaling Can Mitigate Hallucination
input - is the one explicitly computed). Geometric alignment of the vectors is again optimal in the vicinity of 3, 4 for
the scaling factor s (Figure 6): on average, distances and angles between them are minimized for this range.
Figure 2: readout, generate pair.
Figure 3: write, readout pair: enforcing the randomly chosen phrase: “Try to come up with the next wikibio sentence.”
as the query prompt.
Complexity considerations
GRACE learns codebooks via minimization of a loss function during edits. This is an expensive iterative operation
since a number backpropagation steps are necessary. GRACE model has 1,557,611,200 parameters. It takes 162.5 secs
to synthesize a GRACE WikiBio entry. If we do not include the time necessary to reinitialize the model for each pair
processing, this can go down to 37.8 secs.
Larimar uses memory writes and reads. These are implemented as pairs of matrix multiplications (i) for computing the
coordinates of distributed memory slots to write to / read from and (ii) for computing the low-rank memory matrix
(while writing) or extracting readout representation (while reading). These are lightweight operations. Larimar encoder
has 335,152,128 parameters; Larimar decoder has 810,406,400 parameters. It takes 3.1 secs on average to synthesize a
Larimar WikiBio entry.
4
Generation Constraint Scaling Can Mitigate Hallucination
Figure 4: write, readout pair.
Scaling factor (s)
RougeL score
×1
0.39 ± 0.14
×2
0.62 ± 0.17
×3
0.71 ± 0.16
×4
0.72 ± 0.14
×5
0.69 ± 0.13
×6
0.64 ± 0.13
×7
0.59 ± 1.12
Table 1: RougeL scores averaged over WikiBio entries for different scaling factors s for the readout vectors,
zreadout := s × zreadout.
Figure 5: Jaccard similarity for different scaling factors s for zreadout in Larimar. Mean Jaccard similarity scores for
the ideal case in Larimar (zwrite = zreadout) and for GRACE are also plotted as horizontal lines for comparison.
Model sizes are comparable, with Larimar being slightly smaller (approximately 1.3B versus 1.5B for GRACE).
However Larimar is substantially faster in WikiBio synthesis by 1-2 orders of magnitude.
5
Generation Constraint Scaling Can Mitigate Hallucination
Figure 6: Geometric alignmnent between input and output latent space representations. Mean of vector distances
(left) and angles(in degrees; right) for different scaling factors s for zreadout.
Discussion
The ability to constrain generation in the decoder by using lightweight memory primitives as in Larimar encoder-
memory-decoder architecture, offers an excellent, training-free opportunity for mitigating hallucination. Simple,
geometry-inspired operations (here: vector scaling) on selected enc