TEACHING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS TO SELF-
DEBUG
Xinyun Chen1
Maxwell Lin2
Nathanael Schärli1
Denny Zhou1
1 Google DeepMind
2 UC Berkeley
{xinyunchen,schaerli,dennyzhou}@google.com, mxlin@berkeley.edu
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved impressive performance on code
generation. However, for complex programming tasks, generating the correct
solution in one go becomes challenging, thus some prior works have designed
program repair approaches to improve code generation performance. In this work,
we propose SELF-DEBUGGING, which teaches a large language model to debug
its predicted program via few-shot demonstrations. In particular, we demonstrate
that SELF-DEBUGGING can teach the large language model to perform rubber
duck debugging; i.e., without any human feedback on the code correctness or error
messages, the model is able to identify its mistakes by investigating the execution
results and explaining the generated code in natural language. SELF-DEBUGGING
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on several code generation benchmarks,
including the Spider dataset for text-to-SQL generation, TransCoder for C++-
to-Python translation, and MBPP for text-to-Python generation. On the Spider
benchmark where there are no unit tests to verify the correctness of predictions,
SELF-DEBUGGING with code explanation consistently improves the baseline by
2 −3%, and improves the prediction accuracy on problems of the hardest level by
9%. On TransCoder and MBPP where unit tests are available, SELF-DEBUGGING
improves the baseline accuracy by up to 12%. Meanwhile, by leveraging feedback
messages and reusing failed predictions, SELF-DEBUGGING notably improves
sample efficiency, and can match or outperform baseline models that generate more
than 10× candidate programs.
1
INTRODUCTION
Code generation has been a long-standing challenge with a variety of applications, such as code
synthesis from natural languages (Yu et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2021a; Austin et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2022), programming by examples (Devlin et al., 2017; Bunel et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019), and
code translation (Roziere et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2018). In particular, recent large language models
have demonstrated a significant leap in improvement over prior deep neural networks (Chen et al.,
2021a; Nijkamp et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2022). However, for many programming
tasks, generating correct code with a single attempt is challenging. Inspired by observations that
correct code is much more likely to be predicted when multiple programs are sampled from the
model (Chen et al., 2021a; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022), one line of work has designed
reranking techniques to select the best candidate from multiple samples, which typically requires tens
of samples to start with (Shi et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022).
Intuitively, even for human programmers, there is no guarantee that the code written on the first
try is always accurate. Instead of completely discarding the incorrect code, humans typically look
into the code and investigate execution results, then make changes to resolve the implementation
errors. Therefore, prior works propose deep learning techniques to repair the predicted code, which
demonstrate notable performance gains on various coding tasks (Gupta et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2018; Fu et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2023a). However, these approaches require additional training for
the code repair model. While some recent works show that large language models have potential
for generating feedback messages to critique and refine their outputs for some natural language and
reasoning domains (Shinn et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023b; Kim et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022), prior
1
arXiv:2304.05128v2  [cs.CL]  5 Oct 2023
Teaching Large Language Models to Self-Debug
works suggest that such large language models are not yet capable of correcting code when lacking
external feedback, such as unit tests or human instructions (Chen et al., 2023a).
In this work, we propose SELF-DEBUGGING, where we teach the large language model to debug
its own predicted code via few-shot prompting. Without any additional model training, SELF-
DEBUGGING instructs the model to execute the code, then generate a feedback message based on
the code and its execution result. Different from prior works on utilizing human feedback for code
repair, where the feedback message explains the code errors and how to fix them (Chen et al., 2023a;
Austin et al., 2021), SELF-DEBUGGING teaches the model to identify the implementation errors
via investigating into execution results and explaining the code by itself. This debugging process is
reminiscent of rubber duck debugging for human programmers, where explaining the code line-by-
line in natural language to a rubber duck significantly boosts debugging efficiency without expert
guidance (Hunt & Thomas, 2000). Figure 1 illustrates the full procedure of SELF-DEBUGGING.
We evaluate SELF-DEBUGGING on a variety of models, including code-davinci-002 (Chen
et al., 2021a), gpt-3.5-turbo, gpt-4 (OpenAI, 2023) in the GPT model family, as well as
StarCoder (Li et al., 2023b), a strong open-source LLM for code generation. SELF-DEBUGGING
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on different types of code generation tasks, including text-to-
SQL generation, code translation and text-to-Python generation. On the Spider benchmark (Yu et al.,
2018) for text-to-SQL generation where there are no unit tests in the problem description, with code
explanation, SELF-DEBUGGING consistently improves the baseline by 2−3% with different numbers
of initial programs, and improves the prediction accuracy on the most complicated SQL queries by
9%. On both TransCoder for code translation (Roziere et al., 2020) and MBPP for text-to-Python
generation (Austin et al., 2021), utilizing unit tests along with code explanation boosts the accuracy
by up to 12%, and code explanation alone without debugging also consistently improves the code
translation performance by 2 −3%. Meanwhile, SELF-DEBUGGING improves sample efficiency, and
can match or outperform baseline models that sample more than 10× predictions. Our work indicates
that besides improving their ability to generate code from scratch, teaching large language models to
perform SELF-DEBUGGING without human guidance is another promising path to enhance coding
capability and reduce the sampling cost required to accomplish challenging tasks.
Model
Executor
Code
Problem
Explanation
Unit tests
Step 1: Code 
generation
Step 3: Code explanation
Step 2: Code execution
Feedback
Figure 1: SELF-DEBUGGING for iterative debugging using a large language model. At each debug-
ging step, the model first generates new code, then the code is executed and the model explains the
code. The code explanation along with the execution results constitute the feedback message, based
on which the model infers the code correctness and then adds this message to the feedback. The
feedback message is then sent back to the model to perform more debugging steps. When unit tests
are not available, the feedback can be purely based on code explanation.
2
PROMPTING FOR CODE GENERATION
In this section, we discuss the background on prompting for code generation using large language
models. We first introduce few-shot prompting, then discuss how to select the final prediction from
multiple samples based on code execution.
Few-shot prompting. Few-shot prompting instructs the language model to solve a task with several
input-output demonstrations (Brown et al., 2020). Taking text-to-SQL generation as an example, the
2
Teaching Large Language Models to Self-Debug
few-shot prompt prepends the question of interest with a list of (question, SQL) pairs, so that when
the model is asked to predict subsequent tokens of the given prompt, it will follow the prompt format
to generate the SQL query. Figure 2 presents one exemplar for the prompt. Besides input-output
demonstrations, we can optionally add an instruction in the prompt to provide a high-level task
description (Ouyang et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022; Suzgun et al., 2022). For example, in the first two
steps of our SELF-DEBUGGING prompt shown in Figure 3, both prompts start with instructions that
ask the model to generate explanations. We provide the full few-shot prompts in the appendix.
Execution-based code selection. Prior works demonstrate that decoding multiple samples can
significantly improve the performance of large language models (Wang et al., 2023; Shi et al.,
2022). In particular, for code generation tasks, we can utilize code execution to select the final
prediction (Chen et al., 2019; Li et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2023).
One line of work selects the final prediction using the majority vote of execution results (Chen et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022), while other works design reranking schemes to improve the
performance (Zhang et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2023; Yin & Neubig, 2019; Zeng et al., 2022). In this
work, when there are multiple predictions, we follow the first line of work to select the predicted code
with the most frequent execution result among those that do not encounter execution errors, then
apply SELF-DEBUGGING to the code.
Some code generation tasks are accompanied with unit tests to specify the program execution
behavior (Chen et al., 2021a; Austin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Hendrycks et al., 2021). Specifically,
the unit tests are a set of input-output pairs {(ik, ok)}K
k=1, and a program P passes unit tests when
P(ik) = ok, ∀k ∈{1, ..., K}. When unit tests are presented in the problem description, we filter out
programs that do not pass the unit tests before performing the execution-based majority vote.
3
SELF-DEBUGGING FRAMEWORK
Figure 1 illustrates our SELF-DEBUGGING framework for iterative debugging, where we utilize a
pretrained large language model without finetuning it. One turn of SELF-DEBUGGING consists of 3
steps: Generation, Explanation, and Feedback.
• For the Generation step, given the problem description, the model predicts candidate programs.
• During the Explanation step, the model is prompted to process the predictions in a semantically
useful way, such as explaining the prediction in natural language, or creating an execution trace
of the predicted code for a sample input.
• Finally, for the Feedback step, a feedback message concerning the correctness of the predicted
code is generated. This can be determined by asking the model itself, or can be generated
externally from unit tests.
The debugging process terminates when the feedback message states that the prediction is correct, or
a maximum allowed number of debugging turns is reached.
In practice, a SELF-DEBUGGING turn does not always include all steps above. We discuss different
types of feedback that can be automatically acquired and generated for SELF-DEBUGGING below.
Simple feedback. The simplest form of automatic feedback is a sentence that just indicates the
code correctness without more detailed information, which omits the Explanation step in a full
SELF-DEBUGGING turn. For instance, in text-to-SQL generation, the few-shot prompt provides the
feedback message “The SQL prediction above is correct!” for all correct SQL queries, and “The
SQL prediction above is wrong. Please fix the SQL.” for wrong predictions.
Unit test feedback (UT). For code generation tasks where the problem description includes unit tests,
besides utilizing code execution to check code correctness, we can also incorporate the execution
results in the feedback, which provides richer information for debugging. Figure 5 presents a sample
unit test feedback message. Intuitively, inspecting runtime errors and execution results of failed unit
tests also helps human programmers debug more effectively. In our experiments, we will demonstrate
that leveraging unit tests whenever available consistently boosts the SELF-DEBUGGING performance.
Code Explanation feedback (Expl). Despite recent promising progress showing that large language
models can generate critiques to avoid harmful model outputs (Ganguli et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022)
and improve their performance on some natural language tasks (Shinn et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023;
3
Teaching Large Language Models to Self-Debug
Saunders et al., 2022), prior work has yet to show the effectiveness of model-generated feedback on
code generation (Chen et al., 2023a). On the other hand, large language models have been shown
to be capable of describing their generated problem solutions in both text (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima
et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023) and code (Gao et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022) formats.
Inspired by these observations, instead of teaching the large language model to predict error messages,
we propose SELF-DEBUGGING via explaining the generated code. This debugging process is
reminiscent of rubber duck debugging, where a programmer debugs code by explaining it line-by-line
to a rubber duck (Hunt & Thomas, 2000). By describing the code implementation and comparing it
to the problem description, human programmers are usually able to identify the bugs without extra
guidance. Empirically, we observe that a large language model can also benefit from rubber duck
debugging, especially when unit tests are not available.
Execution trace feedback (Trace). Besides explaining the code itself, human programmers also
often understand the code semantic meaning by simulating the execution process. Prior work on code
repair has demonstrated that training the repair model on execution traces improves the debugging
performance (Wang et al., 2018; Gupta et al., 2020). Therefore, when unit tests are available, we
examine another explanation feedback format where the LLM is instructed to explain the intermediate
execution steps line-by-line. Note that both the execution trace and the line-by-line explanation come
from model generation instead of code execution, thus the trace feedback does not require more
information than the pure code explanation feedback; i.e., no access to intermediate execution states.
4
APPLICATIONS
In our evaluation, we showcase applications of SELF-DEBUGGING to different code generation
domains: text-to-SQL generation, code translation, and text-to-Python generation. First, text-to-SQL
generation represents the scenario where no unit tests are available, where SELF-DEBUGGING enables
the model to identify errors and justify code correctness by explaining the predicted code. In code
translation, we demonstrate how to utilize the execution of unit tests to provide feedback messages.
Finally, the text-to-Python domain requires the model to infer prediction correctness when only a
subset of unit tests are presented in the problem description.
4.1
TEXT-TO-SQL GENERATION
The goal of text-to-SQL tasks is to generate the corresponding SQL query given a question 