1 
 
Quantum light sources with configurable lifetime leveraging 
parity-time symmetry 
Nuo Chen,1,9 Wen-Xiu Li,2,3,9 Yun-Ru Fan,2,3,* Hang-Hang Li,1 Hong Zeng,2,3 Wu-Qiang Chi,1  
Heng Zhou,4 Hao Li,5 Li-Xing You,5 Guang-Can Guo,2,3,6,7 Qiang Zhou,2,3,6,7, † Jing Xu,1,8,‡ 
and Xin-Liang Zhang1,8,§ 
1School of Optical and Electronic Information & Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China 
2Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Chengdu 611731, China 
3Key Laboratory of Quantum Physics and Photonic Quantum Information, Ministry of Education, 
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China 
4Key Lab of Optical Fiber Sensing and Communication Networks, School of Information and Communication 
Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China 
5National Key Laboratory of Materials for Integrated Circuits, 
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200050, China 
6Center for Quantum Internet, Tianfu Jiangxi Laboratory, Chengdu 641419, China 
7CAS Key Laboratory of Quantum Information, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China 
8Optics Valley Laboratory, Hubei 430074, China 
9These authors contributed equally: Nuo Chen, Wen-Xiu Li 
*Corresponding author: Yun-Ru Fan (yunrufan@uestc.edu.cn) 
†Corresponding author: Qiang Zhou (zhouqiang@uestc.edu.cn) 
‡Corresponding author: Jing Xu (jing_xu@hust.edu.cn) 
§Corresponding author: Xin-Liang Zhang (xlzhang@hust.edu.cn) 
Abstract Quantum light sources with configurable photon lifetimes are essential for large-scale 
quantum circuits, enabling applications in programmable quantum computing, various quantum 
key distribution protocols, and quantum tomography techniques. However, the fundamental 
trade-off between efficiency and photon lifetime imposes significant challenges on the design 
of high-performance large configurable lifetime quantum light sources. Here, we report on such 
chip-scale quantum light sources by harnessing the unique feature of parity-time (PT) symmetry. 
The core design centers on employing PT-symmetric coupling between two microresonators of 
distinct circumferences, enabling broad-range and selective tuning of intracavity photon density 
of states. By controlling the alignment between resonators, we achieved a 38-fold photon 
lifetime tuning range (4 ~ 158 ps), with the shortest lifetimes near the exceptional points of the 
PT-symmetric systems. The device generates energy-time entangled photon pairs with 
87.1 ± 1.1% interference visibility and a heralded second-order autocorrelation of 𝑔ℎ
(2)(0) = 
0.069 ± 0.001. Our work highlights the potential of PT symmetry for advanced quantum 
applications, including high-speed communication and programmable quantum computing, 
quantum coherent tomography, and beyond. 
 
2 
 
Introduction 
On-chip generation of diverse optical quantum states has been widely demonstrated, highlighting its 
substantial potential for advancing integrated quantum information processing applications [1–8]. As 
the field advances, the scalable and configurable generation and manipulation of quantum states across 
various degrees of freedom become increasingly essential [5,6,9–19]. Photon lifetime is one of the 
critical degrees of freedom in optical quantum states, predominantly determined by the bandgap of a 
two-level system or the cavity quality factor (Q-factor) of a resonator-based photon emitter [20]. For 
example, photons with long lifetimes, on the order of several nanoseconds, typically exhibit relatively 
narrow linewidths, ranging from a few MHz to several hundred MHz. They are indispensable for 
aligning with the atomic transition linewidths to enable effective photon-atom interactions, crucial for 
quantum repeater-based long-distance quantum secure communications [21–22]. On the other hand, 
to maximize the rate of quantum communication systems, the lifetime of single-photons τ must be 
compressed, since the communication bandwidth is proportional to 2/τ, as governed by Fourier 
reciprocity [13]. Short-lived photons are also required in quantum optical coherent tomography [24,25]. 
Furthermore, the ability to configure photon lifetime is vital for a variety of applications. Dynamically 
tunable photon lifetime schemes have been utilized as quantum random number generators [9]. Sources 
with configurable photon lifetime are highly promising for frequency-encoded qubits, a key 
component in scalable quantum information processing technologies [26]. 
On the integrated photonics platform, research has shown that the control of the photon lifetime 
can be realized by integrated modulation modules to shape spectra of single-photon pulses [9,12–16]. 
However, implementing modulation after photon generation complicates the quantum system structure 
and can introduce extra losses. In recent years, optical microresonators utilizing spontaneous nonlinear 
effects have been extensively demonstrated as quantum light sources [1–3,27–34]. It has been shown 
that different photon lifetimes can be achieved by setting distinct coupling gaps between the resonator 
and the bus waveguide [20]. Nevertheless, modifying the photon lifetime becomes challenging once 
the quantum light source devices are fabricated. More importantly, the fundamental trade-off between 
efficiency and bandwidth imposes significant constraints on the design of high-performance 
configurable photon lifetime quantum light sources. That is, to generate photons with a short lifetime, 
3 
 
the duration of light-matter interaction must be reduced (related to an increase of the cavity bandwidth), 
which in return severely deteriorates the generation efficiency [35,36]. Therefore, it is crucial to find 
other photon lifetime adjustment schemes that do not sacrifice the efficiency, or the photon generation 
rate (PGR). 
Recent advances in parity-time (PT)-symmetric systems have attracted substantial attention due 
to their easy implementation yet profound implications in photonics [37–41]. The non-Hermitian 
property of PT-symmetric systems, especially at the exceptional point (EP) where the eigenvalues and 
corresponding eigenvectors coalesce, gives rise to a range of unconventional light-matter interaction 
phenomena [42,43]. These properties enable wide applications in areas such as lasing [44], enhanced 
sensing [45,46], coherent absorption [47], optical frequency combs [48,49], and beyond. In addition, 
we have shown in a recent work that by leveraging PT symmetry and breaking the uniformity of 
resonance linewidth of the coupled system, the trade-off between efficiency and bandwidth has been 
relieved for classical applications such as nonlinear optical signal processing [50]. This indicated that 
the trade-off between short photon lifetime and large PGR may be relieved via a similar linewidth-
manipulation method. Indeed, integrated resonance-manipulated devices have been studied for several 
quantum applications, such as spectral-uncorrelated photon-pairs generation [51,52] or high-
coincidence efficiency photon-pairs sources [53]. Nevertheless, achieving direct and large-range 
control of cavity photon lifetime remains elusive. 
In this work, we design an effective photon lifetime-configurable quantum light source by 
leveraging a dual-ring coupled PT-symmetric system. PT symmetry introduces an extra degree of 
freedom through unbalanced losses to control the decay rates of microresonators, making it naturally 
suitable for adjusting the photon lifetime. The maximum loss contrast near and away from the EP 
enables orders of magnitude control of the photon lifetime. Meanwhile, the PGR has maintained a 
moderately high-value thanks to the undegraded pump enhancement via the linewidth manipulation 
technique. Experimentally, we demonstrate a 38-fold variation in photon lifetime, from 4.1 to 158.4 ps. 
The generation of energy-time entangled photon pairs exhibits a typical raw two-photon interference 
visibility of 87.1 ± 1.1%. A typical heralded second-order autocorrelation 𝑔ℎ
(2)(0) of 0.069 ± 0.001 
is also obtained. 
4 
 
Results 
System design and principle of operation 
We demonstrate the configurable photon lifetime quantum light source using spontaneous four wave-
mixing (SFWM) in a dual-ring coupled PT-symmetric system, as sketched in Fig. 1a. The main ring 
(red) with a radius 𝑅1 is coupled to the auxiliary ring (blue) with a radius 𝑅2. The intrinsic decay 
rates of the main and auxiliary rings are 𝛾1 and 𝛾2, respectively, and the coupling strength between 
the two rings is 𝜅. The auxiliary ring is coupled to the bus waveguide with the coupling decay rate 𝛾c, 
resulting in a total decay rate of the auxiliary ring as 𝛾1 + 𝛾c. When 𝛾c ≫𝛾1,2, the decay rates of the 
two coupled rings become severely unbalanced, and a passive PT-symmetric system is thus formed 
[48]. Given that the radius ratio is set to 𝑅1 = 2𝑅2, the free spectral range (FSR) of the two rings 
(denoted as 𝐹𝑆𝑅1 and 𝐹𝑆𝑅2, respectively) differs by a factor of 2, as depicted by the intracavity 
photon density of state (DOS) in Fig. 1b. A thermal tuning module is fabricated on the auxiliary ring 
to adjust the detuning between the two rings. When a voltage is applied to the thermal tuning electrode, 
the resonance of the auxiliary ring gradually aligns with that of the main ring, consequently reducing 
the Q-factors of the corresponding resonances of the main ring (see Fig. 1c(ii) and 1d). The resonances 
influenced by this adjustment are designated as the signal and idler resonances, whereas the central 
resonance, which remains unchanged due to the FSR difference of the two rings, functions as the pump 
resonance (see Fig. 1d(iii)). The purpose of this design is twofold. On one hand, the reduced Q-factors 
of the signal and idler resonances result in a shorter photon lifetime. On the other hand, the unaffected 
high-Q pump resonance ensures high SFWM efficiency in the quantum light source, thereby 
maintaining a high PGR. Physically, this phenomenon arises because spontaneous four-wave mixing 
(SFWM) primarily occurs in the main ring, where the pump light is predominantly confined [50], while 
the generated photons are emitted through the bus waveguide. The photon lifetime of the emitted 
photons is largely determined by the coupling decay introduced by the auxiliary ring. 
Without loss of generality, we consider in the following the evolution of signal resonance since 
the signal and idler resonances act similarly. According to temporal coupled-mode theory (TCMT), 
the non-Hermitian Hamiltonian of the system reads [40,50] 
5 
 
𝐻̂ = [
𝜔1 −𝑖
𝛾1
2
𝜅
𝜅
𝜔2 −𝑖
𝛾2+𝛾c
2
], 
(1) 
where 𝜔1, 𝜔2 are the resonant frequencies of the main ring and the auxiliary ring, respectively. 
δ𝜔= 𝜔2 −𝜔1 is the detuning between the two rings. Solving the complex eigenfrequencies of 
Hamiltonian, the eigenfrequencies of the PT-symmetric system can be expressed as [40,50] 
𝜔± = [
1
2 (𝜔1 + δ𝜔) −
𝑖
4 (𝛾2 + 𝛾𝑐+ 𝛾1)] ±
1
4 √16𝜅2 −(𝛾2 + 𝛾𝑐−𝛾1)2. 
(2) 
Discussion simplifies when the intrinsic losses of the two rings are identical, i.e., 𝛾1 = 𝛾2, which can 
be approximated in our design and fabricated devices. Under the condition of δ𝜔= 0 (i.e., the two 
rings are aligned), the EP occurs at the degeneracy point of complex eigenfrequencies, i.e., 𝜅= 𝛾c 4
⁄  
(for details, see Supplementary information S1: System analysis methods). 
Consider a typical situation that commonly occurs in integrated coupled ring systems when the 
coupling between two rings is strong and ring-wave coupling loss is small, i.e., 𝜅> 𝛾1,2 ≫𝛾c [9]. 
The system exhibits a typical mode splitting that corresponds to 𝜅 at δ𝜔= 0, as mapped in Fig. 1c(i). 
In contrast, the losses of the coupling decay 𝛾c in our design is much larger than the intrinsic losses 
𝛾1,2. When the coupling coefficient is set to be 𝜅≈𝛾c 4
⁄ , the system operates near the EP, as mapped 
in Fig. 1c(ii). A merged single resonance with a significant low-Q is formed at δ𝜔= 0, which is 
naturally suitable for generating short-lived photons.  
The photon lifetime adjustment process is achieved by changing the detuning between two rings 
using a thermal tuning module, as illustrated in Fig. 1d. Initially, the auxiliary ring with resonant 
frequency 𝜔2 is misaligned with the main ring 𝜔1. The signal and idler resonances can be regarded 
as resonances from a single ring under critical coupling with a linewidth of ∆𝜔= 2𝛾1 when detuning 
is large, e.g., δ𝜔≈𝐹𝑆𝑅1/2 [50]. Therefore, the signal and idler resonances are high-Q resonances 
in this case, as shown in Fig. 1d(i), and the photon lifetime is calculated by [20,54] 
 
6 
 
𝜏high−Q =
1
∆𝜔=
1
2𝛾1. 
(3) 
As the voltage applied to the thermal tuning electrode of the auxiliary ring gradually increases, the 
resonance of the auxiliary ring approaches that of the main ring (Fig. 1d(ii)) until they are completely 
aligned (δ𝜔= 0), as shown in Fig. 1d(iii). In case (iii), the signal and idler resonances operate near 
the EP, with a linewidth of 2Im(𝜔+) ≈𝛾c, according to Eq. (2). At this point, the photon lifetime is 
given by 
𝜏low−Q =
1
𝛾c. 
(4) 
It can be derived from Eqs. (3) and (4) that the maximum achievable contrast of the photon lifetime is 
𝛾c/2𝛾1. Thus, increasing the coupling decay rate of the auxiliary and the bus-waveguide or reducing 
the intrinsic loss of the main ring can enhance the contrast ratio in the tunability of the photon lifetime. 
Device characterization 
We then design the device on the low-loss integrated silicon nitride-on-insulator (SNOI) platform to 
experimentally demonstrate a configurable photon lifetime quantum light source. The chip is 
fabricated by LIGENTEC (Switzerland) using a standard thick silicon nitride waveguide process. The 
waveguide dimensions are 1000 nm × 800 nm (width × height), supporting only the fundamental mode. 
The radius of the main ring is designed as 𝑅1 = 228 μm (with an FSR close to 100 GHz to match 
dense wavelength division multiplexer (DWDM) channels), and the radius of the auxiliary ring is 
𝑅2 = 114 μm. The transmission spectra from 1534 nm to 1540 nm of the system under different 
voltages, i.e., 0 V and 6.6 V, are plotted in Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b, respectively (for details, see 
Supplementary information S2: Spectra characterizations). Under a 0 V bias, the two rings are 
misaligned, and the overall transmission spectrum exhibits a series of near critical-coupled high-Q 
resonances from the main ring (𝐹𝑆𝑅1 = 0.78 nm). Between each two high-Q resonances, there are 
auxiliary ring resonances (yellow lines) with a relatively low extinction ratio (𝐹𝑆𝑅2= 1.56 nm) due to 
the auxiliary ring being in a state of over-coupling with the bus waveguide. Under a bias of 6.6 V, the 
7 
 
resonances of the main