CodeMirage: Hallucinations in Code Generated by Large Language Models
Vibhor Agarwal1∗, Yulong Pei2 , Salwa Alamir2 and Xiaomo Liu3
1University of Surrey, Surrey, UK
2JP Morgan AI Research, London, UK
3JP Morgan AI Research, New York, USA
v.agarwal@surrey.ac.uk, {yulong.pei, salwa.alamir, xiaomo.liu}@jpmorgan.com
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown
promising potentials in program generation and
no-code automation.
However, LLMs are prone
to generate hallucinations, i.e., they generate text
which sounds plausible but is incorrect. Although
there has been a recent surge in research on LLM
hallucinations for text generation, similar halluci-
nation phenomenon can happen in code genera-
tion. Sometimes the generated code can have syn-
tactical or logical errors as well as more advanced
issues like security vulnerabilities, memory leaks,
etc. Given the wide adaptation of LLMs to enhance
efficiency in code generation and development in
general, it becomes imperative to investigate hal-
lucinations in code generation. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first attempt at studying hal-
lucinations in the code generated by LLMs. We
start by introducing the code hallucination defini-
tion and a comprehensive taxonomy of code hal-
lucination types. We propose the first benchmark
CodeMirage dataset1 for code hallucinations. The
benchmark contains 1, 137 GPT-3.5 generated hal-
lucinated code snippets for Python programming
problems from two base datasets – HumanEval and
MBPP. We then propose the methodology for code
hallucination detection and experiment with open
source LLMs such as CodeLLaMA as well as Ope-
nAI’s GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models using one-shot
prompt. We find that GPT-4 performs the best on
HumanEval dataset and gives comparable results
to the fine-tuned CodeBERT baseline on MBPP
dataset. Towards the end, we discuss various mit-
igation strategies for code hallucinations and con-
clude our work.
1
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown great capabili-
ties pushing forward the field of artificial intelligence in gen-
eral and natural language generation in particular. OpenAI’s
∗Work done during internship at JP Morgan AI Research.
1The dataset will be released upon acceptance.
1
import yaml
2
3 def yaml_load(filename):
4
""" Open a file , load its contents into a variable with
yaml , and return it."""
5
with open(filename , 'f') as f:
6
data = yaml.load(f, Loader=yaml.Baseloader)
7
return data
Figure 1: An example of robustness issue in the LLM generated
code. It will raise “FileNotFoundException” in case the file does
not exist.
GPT-3.5 [Ouyang et al., 2022] and GPT-4 [OpenAI, 2023]
as well as open source LLMs such as LLaMA-3.1 [MetaAI,
2024], LLaMA-2 [Touvron et al., 2023], etc. have demon-
strated strong performance in various natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) tasks [Yang et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2023;
Agarwal et al., 2023]. LLMs have also been trained on large
snippets of programming codes and have shown strong per-
formance in the field of code generation. GPT-3.5 and GPT-4
as well as open source models such as CodeLLaMA [Roziere
et al., 2023] can generate code in various programming lan-
guages.
Albeit LLMs show remarkable capabilities, they frequently
hallucinate, i.e., they generate text that sounds plausible but
is incorrect. This makes text hallucination detection task very
challenging as the generated text is often similar in style but
is factually incorrect or conflicting with the input or the con-
text [Zhang et al., 2023b]. According to [Ji et al., 2023],
hallucination is the generated content that is nonsensical or
unfaithful to the provided source content. Similar hallucina-
tion phenomenon can happen in the code generated by LLMs
as well. Sometimes the generated code can have syntactical
and logical errors as well as more advanced issues like se-
curity vulnerabilities, memory leaks, robustness issues, etc.
Figure 1 shows an example of robustness issue in the LLM
generated code snippet. LLM generates a function to load
YAML file but does not check if the file exists before reading
it. Therefore, the generated code snippet has robustness issue
since it will raise “FileNotFoundException” in case the file
does not exist but does not handle the exception adequately.
Considering the adaptation of LLMs in industrial environ-
ment to help code generation and development is becoming
more widespread [Yang et al., 2023], it is very important to
arXiv:2408.08333v2  [cs.SE]  8 Jul 2025
detect and mitigate code hallucinations.
For the first time, we study hallucinations in the code gen-
erated by LLMs. We firstly introduce the code hallucination
definition and a comprehensive taxonomy of code defects that
LLMs can hallucinate. We then propose the first benchmark
dataset – CodeMirage containing GPT-3.5 generated hallu-
cinated Python code snippets and then experiment and mea-
sure LLM capabilities for automatically detecting code hallu-
cinations using one-shot prompts. We believe that this work,
including the comprehensive taxonomy, new dataset and in-
sights, can open new avenues for research and development
in both academia and industry.
The contributions of our paper are summarized as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, we introduce the prob-
lem of code hallucination for the first time and provide
its definition and a comprehensive taxonomy of code de-
fects that LLMs can hallucinate.
• We introduce the first benchmark dataset – CodeMirage
containing GPT-3.5 generated 1, 137 Python code snip-
pets with 5 hallucination types.
• For code hallucination detection, we introduce several
baselines and experiment with open source LLMs as
well as OpenAI’s GPT models. Although code hallu-
cination detection is a challenging task, LLMs demon-
strate reasonable performance in detecting various hal-
lucination types.
• We conduct comprehensive experiments and ablation
studies to demonstrate the capabilities of LLMs for code
hallucination detection and discuss various code halluci-
nation mitigation strategies in the future work.
2
Related Work
2.1
Language Models for Code Generation
The triumph of language models in natural language model-
ing has brought interest among researchers and practitioners
on using language models for code generation. Code gener-
ation refers to generating programs that need to satisfy all
the constraints defined by the underlying task such as test
cases, problem descriptions, etc.
Pre-trained transformer-
based models such as CodeBERT [Feng et al., 2020] are
specifically trained for code generation using Masked Lan-
guage Modeling and Replaced Token Detection training ob-
jectives.
Decoder pre-trained models are designed to pre-
dict the next token based on a given input context.
Ope-
nAI’s GPT-series [Radford et al., 2018] are decoder-based
models for text generation.
Based on GPT-2, [Lu et al.,
2021] released CodeGPT for code completion and text-to-
code generation tasks. After GPT-3 was developed, CodeX2
and GitHub Copilot3 were released for code generation. Af-
ter the success of ChatGPT, OpenAI’s GPT-3.5 [Ouyang et
al., 2022] and GPT-4 [OpenAI, 2023] models became state-
of-the-art for natural language generation. They have shown
good performance in code generation as well [Poldrack et
2https://openai.com/blog/openai-codex, last accessed 23 May
2024.
3https://github.com/features/copilot, last accessed 23 May 2024.
al., 2023], but these models are proprietary. Similar open
source models such as LLaMA-2 [Touvron et al., 2023] and
CodeLLaMA [Roziere et al., 2023] were released for nat-
ural language generation tasks.
CodeLLaMA is an open
sourced LLM based on LLaMA-2 itself but fine-tuned for
code-related tasks such as code generation.
Another rele-
vant direction is detecting software vulnerability using LLMs
where different LLMs [Jensen et al., 2024] and other infor-
mation such as code structures [Lu et al., 2024] have been
explored to detect vulnerabilities in the code.
2.2
Hallucinations in LLMs
Although LLMs have shown remarkable performance in nat-
ural language generation, they still inevitably encounter sev-
eral issues, hallucination being one of the top [Wu et al.,
2024; Ghafouri et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023].
[Ji et
al., 2023] defined hallucination as the generated content
that is nonsensical or unfaithful to the provided source con-
tent. Previous works [Ji et al., 2023; Maynez et al., 2020;
Huang et al., 2021] categorized hallucination into two main
categories – intrinsic and extrinsic. Intrinsic hallucination
happens when the generated output contradicts the source
content, whereas extrinsic hallucination happens when the
generated output cannot be verified from the source con-
tent (i.e., output that can neither be supported nor contra-
dicted by the source). Within the context of LLMs, [Zhang
et al., 2023b] defined hallucination into 3 categories – input-
conflicting (LLM-generated content deviates from the source
input provided by users), context-conflicting (LLM-generated
content conflicts with previously generated information by
itself), and fact-conflicting (LLM-generated content is not
faithful to the established world knowledge) hallucinations.
Similar to text hallucinations, LLMs can hallucinate dur-
ing code generation as well. Sometimes the LLM-generated
code can have syntactical or logical errors as well as more ad-
vanced issues like security vulnerabilities, memory leaks, etc.
There is no prior work that specifically look at hallucinations
in the generated code. [Dinh et al., 2023] studied the buggy-
code completion problem and find that the presence of poten-
tial bugs in the code context significantly degrades the code
generation performance of the LLMs. [Liu et al., 2023] eval-
uated the functional correctness of the LLM-generated code
with large amounts of test-cases newly produced by an auto-
matic test input generator. [Ouyang et al., 2023] conducted
empirical study to measure non-determinism in code gener-
ated by LLMs. They find that results from LLMs can be
highly unstable; non-deterministically returning very differ-
ent codes for the same prompt. [Bhatt et al., 2023] introduced
CyberSecEval, a benchmark developed to help bolster the cy-
bersecurity of LLMs employed as coding assistants. They
find a high tendency of more advanced models to suggest
insecure code, highlighting the critical need for integrating
security considerations in the development of sophisticated
LLMs.
For the first time in the literature, we study hallucinations
in the LLM-generated code. We introduce the code hallucina-
tion definition, a comprehensive taxonomy and then propose
the first benchmark dataset – CodeMirage containing GPT-
3.5 generated hallucinated Python code snippets followed by
the methodology for detecting code hallucinations.
3
Hallucinations in Code Generation
In this section, we formally introduce our problem statement
of code hallucination in Section 3.1 and then present a com-
prehensive taxonomy of five hallucination types that can oc-
cur in code generated by LLMs in Section 3.2.
3.1
Problem Definition
Large Language Models have shown good performance in
code generation.
However, sometimes the generated code
may sound plausible but can have several code defects such
as security vulnerabilities. We define hallucinated code as
the generated code that has one or more code defects such as
dead or unreachable code, syntactic or logical errors, robust-
ness issues such as the code fails on edge cases or raises an
exception, or has security vulnerabilities or memory leaks.
3.2
Taxonomy
Based on different types of code defects that can occur, we
define the following five hallucination categories for the code
generated by LLMs.
• Dead or Unreachable code: Generated code has dead,
unreachable or redundant piece of code.
• Syntactic incorrectness: Generated code has syntactic
errors and therefore, fails to compile.
• Logical error: Generated code has logical errors, i.e.,
the generated code cannot solve the given problem cor-
rectly.
• Robustness issue: Generated code has robustness issues
such as it fails on certain edge cases or raises an excep-
tion (does not perform required exception handling).
• Security vulnerabilities: Generated code has security
vulnerabilities or memory leaks.
4
CodeMirage Dataset
In this section, we discuss the details of our CodeMirage
dataset.
We begin with describing the dataset generation
methodology (Section 4.1) followed by verifying the gen-
erated dataset via human annotations (Section 4.2).
Then
we share dataset statistics and various characteristics of the
dataset in Section 4.3.
4.1
Dataset Generation
For generating the code hallucination dataset – CodeMirage,
we select two popular base datasets – HumanEval [Chen et
al., 2021] and MBPP [Austin et al., 2021].
HumanEval
dataset [Chen et al., 2021] contains 164 Python program-
ming problems with function signatures, problem description
as docstrings, programming solution and test cases for evalu-
ation. Similarly, MBPP [Austin et al., 2021] benchmark con-
sists of 973 crowd-sourced Python programming problems,
designed to be solvable by entry-level programmers, cover-
ing programming fundamentals, standard library functional-
ity, and so on. Each problem consists of a task description,
code solution and 3 automated test cases.
For generating hallucinated code snippets, we use GPT-
3.5. We design explicit prompts for each of the hallucination
types and input them into GPT-3.5 model to get Python code
generations that have specific hallucination types. Table 1
shows the layout of code hallucination generation prompt.
Each prompt has code hallucination definition describing a
specific type of hallucination and an example showcasing a
sample problem statement along with the hallucinated code
and test cases. Specific prompts for different hallucination
types are mentioned in Appendix A. For every problem in
both the datasets, we randomly select one of the five hal-
lucination types and then input type specific prompt along
with the problem description and test cases. As a result, we
get hallucinated code as an output from GPT-3.5 model and
we assign the selected hallucination type as the gold label,
further validated through human annotations as described in
Section 4.2.
4.2
Human Annotations
To validate the dataset and type specific hallucinated code
generations, we conduct human evaluation. We randomly se-
lected 200 programming problems and solutions from both
the datasets (50 from HumanEval and 150 from MBPP) in
proportion to the number of problems in each of the datasets.
We selected a balanced sample with all the hallucination
types in equal numbers. We give detailed instructions of the
annotation task, definitions for each of the code hallucina-
tion types and an example for each. We then ask the annota-
tors to annotate each Python code snippet as one of the five
code hallucination types: “dead code”, “syntactic incorrect-
ness”, “logic