1
Beyond Functional Correctness: Exploring
Hallucinations in LLM-Generated Code
Fang Liu†, Yang Liu†, Lin Shi‡, Zhen Yang§, Li Zhang†*, Xiaoli Lian†, Zhongqi Li¶, Yuchi Ma¶
†State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment (SKLCCSE)
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
§School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, China
¶Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd, China
{fangliu, liuyang26, shilin}@buaa.edu.cn, zhenyang@sdu.edu.cn, {lily, lianxiaoli}@buaa.edu.cn
{lizhongqi7, mayuchi1}@huawei.com
Abstract—The rise of Large Language Models (LLMs) has
significantly advanced various applications on software engineer-
ing tasks, particularly in code generation. Despite the promising
performance, LLMs are prone to generate hallucinations, which
means LLMs might produce outputs that deviate from users’ in-
tent, exhibit internal inconsistencies, or misaligned with the real-
world knowledge, making the deployment of LLMs potentially
risky in a wide range of applications. Existing work mainly fo-
cuses on investigating the hallucination in the domain of Natural
Language Generation (NLG), leaving a gap in comprehensively
understanding the types, causes, and impacts of hallucinations in
the context of code generation. To bridge the gap, we conducted
a thematic analysis of the LLM-generated code to summarize
and categorize the hallucinations, as well as their causes and
impacts. Our study established a comprehensive taxonomy of
code hallucinations, encompassing 3 primary categories and 12
specific categories. Furthermore, we systematically analyzed the
distribution of hallucinations, exploring variations among differ-
ent LLMs and benchmarks. Moreover, we perform an in-depth
analysis on the causes and impacts of various hallucinations,
aiming to provide valuable insights into hallucination mitigation.
Finally, to enhance the correctness and reliability of LLM-
generated code in a lightweight manner, we explore training-
free hallucination mitigation approaches by prompt enhancing
techniques. We believe our findings will shed light on future
research about code hallucination evaluation and mitigation,
ultimately paving the way for building more effective and reliable
code LLMs in the future. The replication package is available at
https://github.com/Lorien1128/code hallucination.
Index Terms—code generation, hallucination, large language
models
I. INTRODUCTION
Code generation is the process of automatically generating
source code based on provided specifications or requirements,
which enables developers to save time by reducing manual
coding efforts and allows them to focus on higher-level
tasks and problem-solving. Moreover, it can aid in ensuring
consistency and reducing the risk of human error during
development [59, 67]. Automatic code generation has been
a longstanding challenge in both software engineering and ar-
tificial intelligence communities. The recent advancements in
Large Language Models (LLMs) have significantly propelled
* Corresponding author: Li Zhang
this field forward [4, 55, 63]. For example, OpenAI’s Codex
[4], released in 2021, has achieved a success rate of 28.8%
in solving a set of 164 hand-written programming problems.
Microsoft’s Copilot, a code generation tool powered by Codex,
has captured the interest of over 1 million professional devel-
opers [15]. Moreover, it has shown the potential to speed up
coding tasks by up to 55% [30]. Subsequently, various code
LLMs emerged in both academia and industry, such as Incoder
[18], StarCoder [39], CodeGen [52, 53], Code Llama [63],
DeepSeek-Coder [19], DeepSeek-R1 [20], ChatGPT [55], etc.
These models have shown impressive performance in many
code intelligence tasks, especially in code generation.
Despite the remarkable success of LLMs, their predic-
tive modeling nature makes them susceptible to generate
results that are not correct and reliable [64, 88]. They are
prone to generate hallucinations across various tasks [28].
Hallucinations refers to the phenomenon that LLMs might
produce nonsensical or unfaithful outputs to the provided
source content [24, 28], which can poses a potential risk
in deploying LLMs across various applications. Most exist-
ing work mainly focuses on investigating the hallucination
for natural language generation (NLG) tasks, for instance,
generative question answering [36], abstractive summarization
[49], dialogue generation [25], etc. However, there is still a
lack of clarity regarding the specific types of content that
LLMs tend to hallucinate during code generation, as well as
their causes and potential consequences they may have. In
the integration of the generated code into their development,
developers may have the following concerns: What types of
hallucinations does a code LLM typically produce? What are
the possible causes and impact of different hallucinations?
How are these hallucinations distributed across widely-used
LLMs and popular benchmarks?
We argue that such hallucinations also occur in the do-
main of LLM-based code generation, primary manifesting in
two main categories: knowledge hallucination and faithfulness
hallucination, similar to the hallucination categories found in
NLG domain [24]. Given the differences between natural lan-
guage generation and code generation—where code possesses
unambiguous semantics and must adhere to stricter constraints
due to its structured nature and specific requirements—we
arXiv:2404.00971v3  [cs.SE]  21 Jan 2026
2
define code hallucination as a phenomenon where an
explicit semantic conflict between the generated code and
established facts due to the failure of the LLM to re-
tain, recall, or process information accurately from users’
requirements, contextual code, or real-world knowledge.
Consequently, compared to NLG, there may be variations
in specific hallucination categories, their causes and impacts
in code generation. The occurrence of code hallucinations
may undermine the correctness, performance, maintenance,
and even security of the developed software. As a result,
the widespread adoption of Code LLMs for code recommen-
dation has the inherent potential to compromise the overall
quality and reliability of software. Hence, it is imperative to
thoroughly investigate hallucinations in LLM-powered code
generation. This will allow us to gain insights into the specific
weaknesses that the LLM model may generate, helps us iden-
tify code snippets or patterns that are likely to be incorrect or
unreliable, providing valuable feedback for improving LLMs.
To clarify terminology, a code (or a solution program) refers to
a complete, functional program that solves the given problem.
A code snippet refers to a self-contained segment of code that
may constitute either a partial or complete solution program.
In this paper, it generally denotes a part (or the entirety) of
the LLM-generated code.
Driven by the critical gaps in understanding hallucinations
in LLM-generated code, we propose three research ques-
tions focused on code hallucination. First, while prior studies
have explored hallucinations in natural language generation,
the unique characteristics of code (e.g., syntax constraints,
functional correctness) necessitate a specialized investigation
into the categories and distribution of code hallucinations.
This motivates RQ1 (Distribution of Code Hallucinations),
which systematically categorizes and quantifies hallucina-
tions across diverse LLMs and benchmarks to establish a
foundational understanding of their prevalence. Furthermore,
through this research question, we aim to reveal whether
certain hallucination categories are model-specific or task-
dependent, providing a foundation for targeted improvements.
Moreover, RQ2 (Hallucination Cause Analysis) is motivated
by the practical imperative to identify factors contributing
to code hallucinations. While prior work attributes NLG
hallucinations to issues like training data biases or model
overconfidence, code generation introduces unique triggers
such as ambiguous/incomplete requirements, or knowledge
gaps in programming APIs. Investigating these causes helps
developers and researchers prioritize mitigation strategies.
Finally, understanding the downstream consequences of code
hallucinations is crucial for risk assessment and quality review
when using LLMs for code generation. Unlike the focus in
NLG hallucination, which concentrates on the impact of text
consistency, RQ3 (Impact of Hallucination) evaluates the
broader impacts of code hallucinations on software quality,
including functional correctness, efficiency, and maintainabil-
ity. These research questions form a holistic framework to
characterize code hallucinations, uncover their root causes,
assess their implications, and inform future solutions. The
interplay between these questions ensures a comprehensive
analysis: RQ1 identifies “what” code hallucinations exist, RQ2
explains “why” they occur, and RQ3 evaluates “how” they
affect real-world code quality.
To answer these questions, we conducted a thematic analysis
[9] of the LLM-generated code to summarize and catego-
rize the hallucinations presented in it based on the unique
characteristics of the code, and also analyze the causes and
possible impacts of the code hallucinations. Specifically, we
collected 3,120 code samples generated by different LLMs
on two widely-used code generation benchmarks, and employ
the open coding process to analyze these samples. Finally, we
establish a comprehensive taxonomy of hallucinations, which
comprises 3 primary categories (Requirement Conflicting hal-
lucinations, Code Inconsistency hallucinations, and Knowledge
hallucinations) and 12 specific types of hallucinations, and also
summarized their causes and impacts. Then we conducted a
comprehensive investigation and various statistical analyses of
these hallucinations from diverse perspectives to gain a deeper
understanding of their distributions, causes, and impacts, aim-
ing to explore the prevailing challenges and opportunities in
the field of code generation with LLMs. The analysis reveals
that ❶code LLMs are frequently influenced by a diverse
range of hallucinations, with Requirement Conflicting being
the most prevalent hallucination across all studied LLMs and
benchmarks. ❷Both the model’s inherent capabilities and the
prompt quality contribute to the hallucination. ❸Regarding
the impact, incorrect functionality is the most common and
direct consequence of a majority of hallucinations, while
code readability and efficiency are also typically affected.
Therefore, it is imperative to develop effective techniques to
mitigate hallucinations during code generation.
Based on our findings, we performed a preliminary ex-
periment to explore training-free hallucination mitigation ap-
proaches by prompt enhancing techniques. The results suggest
that ❹prompting the LLM to refine requirements or per-
form chain-of-thought reasoning helps mitigate Requirement
Conflicting hallucinations, while supplementing prompts with
relevant domain knowledge reduces hallucinations stemming
from knowledge conflicting hallucinations.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• Hallucination taxonomy of LLM-generated code: We
conducted a comprehensive study to analyze the types of
content LLMs may tend to hallucinate in code generation,
and established a taxonomy of code hallucination categories.
• Thorough analysis of code hallucinations: We systemati-
cally analyzed the distribution of hallucinations across var-
ious LLMs and code generation tasks, and also investigated
the causes and impact of code hallucinations.
• Hallucination mitigation exploration: We evaluated three
widely-used prompt enhancing strategies to assess their ef-
fectiveness in reducing LLM hallucinations, complementing
this analysis with in-depth qualitative case studies to uncover
the underlying mechanisms.
• Implications for addressing code hallucinations: We de-
liberated on the findings and implications associated with
evaluating and mitigating hallucinations in LLM-generated
code.
3
II. PRELIMINARY
A. Terminology
To facilitate our definition of hallucination in the context of
code generation, we first clarify several key concepts.
Definition 1: Requirement. The requirement refers to the
natural language description about the programming task, as
provided in the user’s input (prompt) to the LLM.
Definition 2: Contextual Code. The contextual code encom-
passes both the code included in the user’s input (prompt) and
prior code generated by the LLM.
Definition 3: Real-world Knowledge. The real-world knowl-
edge refers to publicly available and verifiable information
derived from human experience or natural activities.
Definition 4: Established Fact. The established fact refers to
objective, clear, verifiable, and context-bounded units of in-
formation derived from: (1) requirements (e.g., user-specified
input/output format constraints), (2) contextual code (e.g.,
variable names, API usage given in the contextual code), and
(3) real-world knowledge (e.g., mathematical laws).
B. Definition of Code Hallucination
When generating code, LLMs may involve contextual infor-
mation from various sources, including user requirements, con-
textual code, and real-world knowledge. For various reasons,
the generated code may not always remain consistent with the
contextual information and instead exhibit semantic conflicts.
We argue that these semantic conflicts can be divided into two
main types: (a) conflicts arising from failure to retain or recall
contextual information, and (b) conflicts arising from errors in
logical reasoning when converting retained information into
actual code. In order to maintain consistency with the core
meaning of hallucination in the NLG domain, we regard the
first type of conflict as code hallucination. Given the black-box
nature of LLMs, we typically can only analyze the final output
(i.e., the generated code), making it often difficult to precisely
attribute a conflict to one type or the other. Therefore, for the
feasibility of practical classification, we further restrict code
hallucination to “explicit semantic conflict” between generated
code and established facts, where the conflict is immediate
and obvious, not dependent on complex logical reasoning. In
such cases, the probability that the conflict originates from the
second type is small, allowing us to reasonably and clearly
classify it as the first type.
Based on the above analysis, we formally define code
hallucination as a phenomenon where an explicit semantic
conflict between the generated code and established facts
due to the failure of the LLM to retain, recall, or
process information accurately from users’ requirements,
contextual code, or real-world knowledge. This discrepancy
could arise due to flawed training data sources [34, 54],
sub